Lovely to have you along with us today.
We appreciate your time coming
before the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee at the start of our scrutiny for
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
We have a robust session ahead of us going into our range
of details, but we welcome your contribution over the next
30 minutes, giving some oversight of the portfolio
and any particular areas you might like
to focus on in your opening remarks.
And then I'm sure there'll be plenty of from members.
Very good. Well, thank you so much.
And I've got a few comments I may read,
although just to get some things on record.
Uh, but then of course, I know you've got officials
for many, many, many hours ahead of you,
which is a very good thing.
Uh, so I'm pleased to be able to appear
before the committee today
and extend apologies from the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
the writer of Winston Peters,
who's currently overseas on an official visit to, uh,
uh, new Caledonia.
This is perhaps unsurprising given the Minister Peters has
been out of New Zealand pursuing our foreign policy
interests for more than 110 days
since the coalition government was formed.
He, along with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Defense,
the Minister of Climate Change,
and myself, have all been active in our overseas
engagements this year.
As we look to revitalize our important relationships
collectively, we've met face to face
with counterpart from more than 60 countries,
delivering the message that New Zealand is open
for business, and that we are ready
and willing to enhance our international connections in
order to make New Zealand safer
and to make it more prosperous.
In February, the government agreed to align, uh,
diplomatic resources and guide broader New Zealand Inc.
Efforts behind a reset
of New Zealand's foreign policy in the face
of a more complex and contested global outcome.
And the reset to had six prior areas, uh,
significantly increasing focus on Southeast
Asia and on India.
Our reinvigorating our relationship with traditional
and like-minded partners, uh,
sustain our deep focus on Pacific
and re-energize the 2018 Pacific Reset target
multilateral engagement on issues of direct interests
or where core New Zealand values
and freedoms are at stake, uh, support new, uh, groupings
of like-minded partners that can advance
and defend our interests and capabilities
and promote the coalition government's goal of, uh,
affecting a serious deep change in export value over the
next decade through active economic diplomacy
to fuel growth, uh, economic, uh, growth.
Uh, we already, uh, delivered some early results, uh,
a against each of the reset six, uh, uh, lines.
These include securing commitments from key South
and Southeast Asia partners, including Ian, India, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand,
and Vietnam, to deepen ambition in our relationships in the
period ahead, uh, joining our traditional,
like-minded partners in a range of activities, deployments
and public statements on issues of shared concerns such
as the Middle East Ukraine, south China Sea, North Korea,
and malicious cyber activity
participating in the United Kingdom,
United States led efforts
to protect the Red Sea shipping from how to, uh,
attacks alongside our longstanding Middle East deployment,
having prime deluxe and chair
and meeting of the Indo-Pacific four IP four, uh,
with the leaders of Australia, Japan,
and South Korea in the margins of the NATO summit,
unlocking immediate tariff savings
of a hundred million dollars per year for exporters
with the entry into force of the EU FTA, uh,
on one May of this year.
And can I recognize, uh, the work of the previous government
and then how the house came together to get that
through the process quickly, uh, to the betterment, uh,
and benefit of our exporters growing new markets
through a conclusion of a free trade agreement with, uh, UAE
and uh, GCC and an agreement on climate change.
Trade and Sustainability Act signed just a few weeks ago,
uh, at, um, at the margins of the, uh, apec,
uh, meeting, resolving 14 non-par tariff barriers, uh, uh,
affecting nearly $190 million worth of exports as part
of refocus work program,
and delivering our largest ever annual international
development cooperation program into the Pacific.
It's $760 million,
which helps address economic vulnerability, climate change,
social cohesion, uh, geostrategic competition in the region.
This represents positive progress,
but we are intent on building on this in
the months and years to come.
We recognize that protecting
and advancing New Zealand's interests in the face
of sharpening geo-strategic risk will, uh,
require further hard work.
And the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and trade staff onshore
and offshore have a major part to play in that.
And the secretary be, Cory
and his senior leadership team, will shortly appear
before you, uh, uh, to answer many
of your quick questions in detail.
But it's important to note that engagement by a broad range
of New Zealand agencies will also be critical
to achieve the reset, uh, resets level of ambition.
Agencies expertise
and commitment is vital, for example,
to progressing our broad base interests in Australia, the US
and the Pacific, and in Southeast Asia, as well
as our economic and trade agenda
and protecting our multinational interests, uh,
to conclude a chair, uh,
for a relatively small country like New Zealand, it's, it's,
uh, essential that we work together
and use all the levers at our disposal,
complimenting the efforts
of our close partners where we can.
Excellent. Thank you very much. Right. Questions?
Uh, first question from,
Um, look, thank you.
I'll, I'll probably start on trade
while you're here and start.
Congratulations on UAE and GCC and, and DX.
I think that's spread progress, but, um, how's end e going?
Uh, well, well, well, just on those, uh,
three agreements, they are significant.
Uh, for New Zealanders, uh, both the UAE
and the GCC, they go very well together.
Uh, Damon, as you'll know, uh, on entry into force, uh,
when you include the, uh, UAE 51%
of our exports will be tariff free through the GCC rising
to 99%, uh, uh, over 10 years.
It is the most comprehensive deal that, uh,
GCC has done in the first
with the major agricultural exporter.
And although the tariff rates are not as high
as some other parts of the world, you've been there,
you know, it's a very competitive market.
And we have stolen a march on some
of our friendly competitors, as an example, Australia,
where particularly, uh, around high quality food and,
and take lamb as an example,
we now have a significant advantage
in those markets over them.
So we have a first mover advantage India, uh, uh, you know,
as a relationship that we said we will make
a strategic priority.
I think we've demonstrated that, uh, over the year, uh,
there have been visits there
with the Deputy Prime Minister early in the year.
I've had three visits to India.
I've engaged with my counterpart almost six times in
India and around the world.
The Prime Minister met with, uh, prime Minister Modi, uh,
a short while ago, and he's extended a personal invitation
for the Prime Minister to visit next year,
which has been accepted,
but it's not a one way street in as far
as us putting effort in.
Of course, we've seen the Indian president visit
New Zealand, uh, uh, uh, the first time in, if ever,
I think maybe, if not in a very long period of time,
which shows that relationship is growing.
On the trade front, we've been able to lift a number of,
uh, barriers to trade.
So log exports have resumed,
although we need to continue to pursue that.
Uh, that was something that that New Zealand did
around environmental standards.
We've found a way through and,
and we are looking for other ways to trade more.
But I guess in as far as traders concerned, I would say
that I, I think the relationship is in the best place
that has been for a while,
yet there is still more work to do.
Before we could start talking about any type of trade, you
Know, I understand that India,
the new government has undertaken
or is undertaking a review of trade, is that,
Um, not, not that I'm overly aware of.
I did read some, uh, uh,
newspaper article we printed in New Zealand, uh,
that a small think tank in India had said that,
but I haven't seen any, uh, thing,
uh, directly from the government.
Uh, all I, all I would do is say, you know,
it's a little bit like trade anywhere in the world.
There are a lot of people that, um, have a view of
what is happening should happening, should happen
in my engagements with Minister Il, it's constructive,
it's progressive, and they want to trade more with us.
We're not yet at the stage to talk about trade architecture,
Just one. Do
you think the Prime Minister will be able
to honor his promise to have a trade deal,
uh, within three years?
Uh, well, he's ambitious for New Zealand.
If he doesn't, it's my fault, not his.
'cause he's given me the job.
Right. Next question. Dr. Lauren Shema.
Thank you. Thank you for being here, minister.
Um, now one of the things that you mentioned in terms
of both foreign affairs and trade
that is often concern is obviously with the recent new, uh,
US election, but also in terms of some of our positioning
around, uh, the constant talk about joining August two
and some of the concerns that's been raised by China,
which is one of our biggest trade partners around this.
Now, you have also recently been to China as well.
Have you heard any more in terms of some of the concerns
and the fact that it,
we are now being perceived internationally
as moving away from our independent foreign affairs
Policy? No,
actually, if anything, I, I hear when I'm overseas, uh,
a recognition of New Zealand's independent foreign policy.
We have the ability to, uh, uh, to make decisions, uh,
as stand up the values that are important for New Zealand.
And, you know, we must also as a government,
take your time particularly considered, in fact.
So in as far as all this is concerned,
no decisions have been, have been made as a government,
a coalition government following a a, a similar process
to the previous labor government did as
to fully understand it, uh, and to consider it.
And at a given point in time, there may well be a decision,
uh, for, uh, New Zealand to be made.
But in as far as our relationship with, uh,
China is concerned, it's a very important one.
In fact, it's one of our, it's probably our most
important economic relationship.
You are right. I've recently visited there.
In fact, I've had two visits to China this year, uh,
and I've also met with my counterpart,
the Chinese commerce minister, minister won, went to five
or six times in China around the world.
And that relationship remains strong also.
Uh, but it is clear to both sides
that we won't always agree on everything,
and that's human nature.
But we must respectfully, uh, talk, uh, directly
to each other and everybody to talk about things in public.
And you're seeing this government continue in the fashion
that the previous government did.
Just one more supplementary question on that.
So, I mean, ORUS two isn't the only signifier
to the international community that we are
aligning ourselves up much more closely with the,
with us then with other part, with other, some
of the other partners, you know,
and another example of this is the reason iPath as well,
and the move away from using terms like Asia Pacific into
Indo-Pacific, which is a very American centric terminology.
So when we are looking at,
and you being the Minister of Trading,
we're looking at something like iPath,
what genuine benefit is that then going to be bringing
for people in New Zealand,
and particularly when it comes to any, some
of the binding elements around climate change,
because a lot of that puts in frameworks and guidelines,
but non-tangible benefit.
And we did hear about that as well from some
of the submitters on iPad.
Um, but I'm just gonna say that that does have a very
American centric perspective in that particular framework.
No, well, I wouldn't accept your framing of that. Indeed.
In my introductory remarks, I'm sure I used, uh, the term,
uh, um, uh, you know, Southeast Asia, Asia specific, uh,
a number of times I didn't use, IPIP is a particular name
or some agreements that we have signed.
You've asked, is there
benefits to New Zealand through those?
I mean, there's a green member of Parliament.
The answer is yes, there are significant in the areas
of climate change and working together
with likeminded countries around, you know, finding ways
to have greater investment available to meet some
of our climate change obligations.
But ultimately, uh, we have a, a range of countries
around the world that we engage with.
One of the best things New Zealand has achieved under
success of governments,
and we must continue to do so, is to openly engage
and talk directly with countries overseas.
It very infrequently happens that we, uh,
don't speak directly.
Uh, and the reason for this is we are at a small nation,
a long way from everywhere.
We have a voice often
that is bigger than our relative size in our position,
and we need to guard that very carefully, stand up
for the rights that New Zealanders, uh, you know, uh,
believe are important and speak frankly about things.
And it does mean that we will do different things
with different, uh, countries and partners around the world.
But I stress again, you know, the relationship
with China is, uh, one of our most important economic ones.
And it's a strong one. And it's one
of this government places importance on the previous
government that Bill
Tyson. Yeah. Um,
minister. So further on that, I mean, it's,
it's one thing to, um, have a relationship with China
where we can speak, frankly, with each other,
but is it really tenable to think
that if we join a security pac, uh, that's purpose is
to project military deterrence, um, designed
to contain China's influence in Asia, that
that wouldn't affect our trading relationship?
Well, especially given the recent
comments by the Chinese ambassador.
Um, well, uh, uh, I'm not gonna speculate on
what the government may or might not do.
We're following a similar course
to the government you were a member of previously, which is
to consider to better understand, uh, that part of Aus.
And then, uh, there may well be a decision point, uh,
that we will look at and,
and, you know, decide what's best for New Zealand.
So I'm not gonna speculate on what something might
or might not mean at this stage.
I will make the case though, that, as you know,
there is nothing for us to pull out of at the moment.
'cause there is nothing that we have joined.
But the point of that is, I think it's very important that,
you know, when it comes to foreign affairs
and trade, we should all work as hard as we can to, uh, uh,
remain bipartisan because it goes
above politics in New Zealand.
You know, the way that we are viewed
around the world is something that endures, and it must,
and, you know, as a government, we've been reaching out to,
uh, opposition parties to include them where we were,
where we are able to, and we will continue to do that
because it is in the best interest for New Zealand
that we make decisions together
that are good for New Zealand.
But in as far as office is concerned, uh,
no decision has been made,
and we're not, uh, in a position
where there is a decision point.
But given that you are, um, actively considering it, w
what, from your perspective, are the foreign policy optics
of, uh, of New Zealand joining a security pact led
by three white angular secs in west countries, trying
to hold onto US military primacy in Asia, when so much
of our soft power has relied, uh, on our relationships
and the way that we work in the Pacific, our relationships
with Southeast Asia, our willingness to act independently
of other Western countries
and take principle positions, the things
that you were just saying, Mm-Hmm.
Well, that's way David Saxon like me.
I know that you don't mean that to sound that the way
that it did, uh,
but the pointer, I guess, is that, uh,
we must consider all of those things.
And it's probably, uh, you know, questions are open,
you know, are more about speculation at this time.
I guess what I'm saying is it, it would be, uh, you know,
it's in New Zealand's best
interest to consider all of these things.
Uh, uh, we have an obligation to duties a government to do
so, just as your government was too, by the way.
And actually there was no decision.
And, you know, there is a public debate that comes on,
goes on from time to time, that's a healthy thing.
We are hearing from different, uh, uh, uh, uh, um, you know,
governments around the world, their view of these things.
You know, we believe in, uh, freedom of speech,
but I'm not gonna speculate at the stage
about what might might not happen.
'cause not a decision point.
Supplementary question, Tim Costley. What,
What would also be the optics if we weren't walking in
lockstep with our only formal ally Australia?
Well, um, particularly if it was b
'cause we're being dictated to by another country.
Yeah. Well, well, the answer is we are not dictated
to by other countries.
Uh, you know, our, our closest relationship any
of the world certainly is with Australia.
And, uh, it's one that's important
to the citizens of both sides.
And we do many things, uh, together with Australia, uh, uh,
around the world from, uh, you know, from security,
from defense, uh, to trade.
But ultimately, uh, you know, uh, the things
that have been used as best interest, we stand up, uh,
for, and we talk about.
I wonder if there's anything here you'd like
to, uh, to offer?
Uh, thank you very much, minister.
I'm indeed Corie, the Secretary of Foreign Affairs.
Um, I agree with the minister's comments,
and I think, uh, Brooke Barrington, the Secretary
of Defense, spoke to the committee on these issues,
I think on Tuesday afternoon.
Um, as the minister says, uh,
we are at an early exploratory stage in respect of Aus.
Um, as part of that exploration, we are going
to take all considerations into account
as we always would in an Orthodox policy process.
They will take into account the fundamental importance
of our alliance with Australia.
They will also take into account our deep equities
with the United Kingdom and the United States.
Um, all three countries, of course, uh, five Eyes partners
with New Zealand, and we collaborate deeply with them
as we have, have done across success of governments
on some very significant national security issues.
We will also take, uh, the views
of other countries in our region, not just one country,
but the region as a whole.
And, and can I also just, just ask to follow up on Dr.
Nan's point, thinking not just Australia, but uh, you know,
and into other countries in terms of influence and,
and the Indo-Pacific.
As the question was framed in terms of the IP four
and you mentioned the foreign ministers meeting.
What, what, what, what has been the importance
and the focus of, of those relationships
with Japan and South Korea as well?
Not just in terms of, uh, a safe
and secure, um, uh, Asia Pacific, Indo-Pacific area,
but also in terms of engaging more globally, for example,
with, with nato?
Hmm. Well, look, it just very important we continue
to engage, and NATO's a good example of that.
The previous government, there was a lot outreach towards
nato welcome to come to meetings.
And, you know, that would continue.
It gives us an opportunity, uh, at a larger table, uh,
to talk about the views
and the values that are reported to New Zealand.
It also gives us the opportunity if we take NATO
to show solidarity against the illegal invasion
of Russia into the Ukraine.
And we have a very important role to play in that.
So I guess the point that I would make is that, uh,
you know, new Zealand's ability
to engage broadly on a number
of issues is one of our strengths.
We must continue to do that.
That doesn't mean from time to time we won't be closer
to some areas than others.
But actually we take these relationships extremely
seriously, and they're important to us,
and we work very hard to service them.
Supplementary from Lauren.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I just wanna first just quickly go back to something
that the minister said, which is around the climate,
you know, some of the, the, the climate obligations.
But again, I want to reframe in terms of the way IP works,
which is none of that is binding,
which means it's a nice to have.
So it's, but it's not a bottom line.
But what I wanna check is also picking up from
what other speakers have already said as well.
You know, you mentioned yourself
that we don't o operate in isolation.
So will the minister also make a commitment,
or from a perspective of genuinely actively listening
to our Pacific neighbors
and what they have to say about any kind of discussions
around orchestra as well,
because that's where a lot of the whatever happens,
will take place in the Pacific,
as we've seen in history and in the past.
So is that something that the minister is able
to make a commitment of to listen to our Pacific neighbors?
So, so on the point of iPad, it wasn't so much
around climate that it was binding.
There were climate change agreements that, uh,
New Zealand has entered into.
The government takes its obligations
as serious as previous government.
The point that I was making was,
if you're saying there was no benefit to IPF,
actually in some of the agreements we've signed,
that allows us to collaborate
and work with other countries to find ways to free up, uh,
uh, finance for climate change activity, which includes,
you know, innovation of the business community.
So that's where the benefit is.
Something doesn't have to be binding
for a government like New Zealand to be able to use it
and to take advantage of it.
And, um, all all I would say is we work very closely
with our, our Pacific relation, our eighties,
and, you know, the Pacific Island countries,
that the very important relationships to us.
Uh, they are one of respect and mutual respect.
We work together with them as a close neighbor, uh,
and we do many things together from development systems
to grow their economies to, you know, alleviate poverty
to significant, uh, uh, uh, cooperation
and activity around climate change.
And we always talk to 'em directly and,
and take their views seriously.
I'm just interested in minister.
We've had in this committee a briefing on non tariff
barriers that work is ongoing, it's a big focus,
and we understand there's a lot
of opportunity in that space.
Um, can you talk a bit to that?
There has been some good work done this year,
but where, how's that translated
and where do you see the opportunities are
over the next 12 months?
Yeah, that's right. And, and I wanna
thank the committee for that work.
It's extremely helpful.
Uh, you will all know, um, that non taric barriers not,
well, still, we talk a lot about tariff rates
and New Zealand has been
resoundingly successful in signing trade agreements
that give us advantage into markets
to get those tariff rates down.
But in many markets, we will find other barriers
that are not based upon a tariff
or tax that make it very difficult for exporters.
And I'll give you two examples on that.
Uh, Australia with, um, structural timber
and Australia has a timber deficit.
They need more wood for the world.
New Zealand cannot export structured timber there
because they've different than our,
and, uh, you know, they're either right aware, right?
But our buildings are not falling down.
And so we are working with Australia,
we see if we can find a way to align the standard
and understanding, have them recognize, uh, that our, uh,
would, uh, is suitable
'cause that would unlock in the first year alone,
more than $200 million worth of exports.
Another example is the European union's, uh,
deforestation regulations they put in place
and, uh, recently have suspended for a year, you know,
as estimates of that would cost.
New Zealand export is up
to $200 million every year to comply.
Yet the government of New Zealand is able
to give the European Union the assurance
that their legislation requires,
because what they're trying
to stop is illegal in New Zealand.
Doesn't happen. If it does, people are prosecuted.
And so, you know, I, I, uh, agree with the intention
of the European Union, but not the way
that it will affect New Zealand.
And so we're working with them
and we're very pleased that they put that off for a year.
We'll continue to engage.
So I think that one of the biggest areas, uh, uh, you know,
on top of, um, um, you know, free trade agreements
that we can help our exporters is continuing
to work on these free, uh, these, uh, uh, non power barriers
and technical barriers to trade.
Uh, we will never be in a position where we'll fix 'em all,
they'll continue to come at us,
but we need to be, uh, much more nimble than that.
And I think the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, NPI
and others have done a very good job.
Thank you. Damien O'Connor. Uh,
Look, thank you. I'll just go
back to trade.
Uh, we have a president-elect us our second biggest
trade market, um, who was promising, uh, to,
or had promised to put on tariffs.
Have you been speaking to
or connected, do you think it's a good idea to connect
with the Australians to work on a plan as to
how we might react should those tariffs be imposed?
The, so I've had a, an opportunity
to talk in general terms, uh, with, um,
with my counterpart in Australia.
Um, I think most recently was at the C-P-T-P-P meeting in,
uh, just a, a week or so ago, probably with last week.
Uh, at a very high level, uh, uh, the,
the answer is we are putting thought into the relationship
and trade relationship with, uh, America.
It is a very important one to us.
Uh, we do need to wait until, uh, you know, the new, uh, uh,
presidency and this team are replaced,
have only just announced who their trade representative, my,
uh, uh, equivalent
and will have an opportunity to engage there.
Uh, the, the one thing I would note though, uh, is, um,
when, uh,
president Trump became president the first time round, uh,
I was the trade minister, then the TPP had been signed
that he announced that he was withdrawing from it.
There was significant concern around that.
Uh, but even though we didn't have a trade agreement
with the US and there were some tar put on steel
and other things, so, you know, formed New Zealand
that their economy grew and our trade grew significantly.
And so, uh, I think that, uh, you know, we must, uh,
be very, very focused on the relationship
across the board, firstly.
And secondly, tariffs, uh, are harmful
to trade, there is no question.
Uh, but in as far as, you know, an agreement to corroborate
that with, um, Australia at this stage, no.
That's not a conversation we've
had, although I've had, you know,
I i, can I just use the, the, the example you referred to
that is on timber and on aluminum, the fact
that the tariffs went on then, um,
and haven't come off since.
Is that not a worry for us?
Uh, well, well, it is certainly something that we, uh,
would like to see rectified.
But I guess the other point I would make is during
that period of time, we saw significant movement from
that administration around business visas
and New Zealand to get to, uh, America
and to do business more easily.
And in fact, that, uh, was quite a significant change, uh,
for us and the business community have, have welcomed it.
It gives them greater, a bit
of greater rights in that market.
And so, uh, you know, there is nowhere in the world where,
uh, trade is free from New Zealand.
There will always be challenges, and it is always difficult.
We are always going to face headwinds our exporters as
with success of governments,
but particularly our trade negotiators and,
and our diplomatic team overseas are very
effective and very nimble.
And I back them to continue to do well for us.
But Damian, um,
and as far as the new administration is concern base
with last time, uh, you know, we'll see where that goes.
I think it's very, very clear that there will be tariffs,
places around the world, the degree
to which they will have an impact upon New Zealand.
We'll wait and see, but, uh, we will be, uh, working as hard
as we can to make sure that New Zealand exports
and businesses can continue to do well in the US market.
You, uh, final question, Phil Tifford. Thanks,
Chair. Um,
I wonder, um, Whether the, um,
the, uh, uh, prospect of a, a Trump White House
has changed the government's view about strategic alignment
with the us, um, words that the, uh,
prime Minister used recently, um, particularly given, um,
president Trump's, well-known views about multilateralism,
about the rules based order.
Um, and I'm thinking particularly about the US role in Gaza,
where they're providing much of the, um, much of the
munitions and military equipment used in the
onslaught on Gaza.
They voted three times against our position, um,
in the UN general assembly on Gaza.
Um, does
that change the government's view about
strategic alignment with the us?
I guess the point I would make is it's probably less than
a month since the election, right?
So, um, so it's very early days Prime Minister and,
and President elect Trump, uh, have had a,
a telephone conversation with a very constructive
and very, very positive one.
I think that's a very important, uh, signal, uh,
from from both sides.
Um, but, but to answer your question succinctly, actually,
there is massive we do with America, as
with many other countries around the world.
And you know, you mentioned sort of multilateralism,
I think President Trump's view around, uh, you know, parts
of the WT O that have not worked as well as they need to.
I would share, you know,
he is had a particular focus in his first term
around the dispute settlement process.
It doesn't work as well.
It didn't work as well as it needs to
for countries like New Zealand or anybody else.
It does need to be fixed that it hasn't, is a failure
of the WTO and the members, not any one country.
We have invested in significant effort at time into, uh,
you know, uh, ensuring
that actually the dispute settlement process, uh,
can be stood up again and will work
because New Zealand needs it to work.
But irrespective reviews of different parts of the world,
uh, um, you know, uh, uh,
a a a a world Trading system based on rules,
the rules based approach to
that multiple system is important to New Zealand.
Something will continue to set up. Excellent. Alright.
Thank you very much for your time this morning, minister.
Appreciate it. Okay.
We'll move now into the annual review hearing
for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
We can get the detailed answers now.
All right. Politic. So much. Good morning, Mr. Corey.
Welcome before the committee for the annual review
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
and congratulations on your recent appointment to the role
of Secretary of Foreign Affairs.
We look forward to, uh, range of discussions with you
and your team over the next three hours.
Sit down for this hearing. Um,
we welcome your introduction remarks.
You will have seen the structured
gender, uh, from the committee.
It has been circulated, uh, identifying the key, key areas
that we wish to focus our, uh, discussion on today.
Of course, we will have a flexibility within that, uh,
and the time allocations will be followed reasonably
closely, but of course we'll be able to flex a bit within
that based on the committee's desire.
We've scrutinize any particular aspect of it,
and we should be all done by.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and good morning to members of the committee.
Um, and thanks for the opportunity
to remark on the ministry's performance over the
20 23 20 24 year.
I'm joined by members of the ministry senior leadership team
who will join me, um, in answering your questions.
I wanna preface my comments on the year in review
by observing that in foreign policy
achievement is often a result of effort over time.
And to be sure, we often find ourselves reacting
to the world as we find it, whether
by surging a response into managing a consular crisis
or a humanitarian crisis, or tackling a new trade barrier.
But we must also shape
and build the world as we want it,
as we have done over the past year
by advancing trade architecture
like the agreement on climate change, trade
and sustainability, by ensuring
that international law evolves on complex issue
of the interplay between statehood
and climate change, by reinvesting in relationships
with like-minded countries
with which we share deepening interests by defending
their target treaty system
or the universal system of human rights.
By energizing new Britains of countries such
as the Indo-Pacific four,
the support a more resilient region,
and by literally building things like new runways
and Solomon Islands
and ue defending, shaping
and building rules, relationships, architecture.
And indeed, infrastructure takes expertise.
It takes effort and patience,
and this often spans several governments.
So I acknowledge as Mr.
Mcla did the work of the last government, as well
as Chris c Brooke Barrington
and Rob Taylor, each of whom led the ministry
before I took over secretary on the 1st of July.
In this remarks this morning,
the associate minister highlighted some
of the outcomes under the coalition government's
foreign policy reset.
These have been pursued against the backdrop
of a world which is less open, less secure,
and more volatile.
Certainly in comparison,
when I joined the ministry 35 years ago
as a graduate diplomat, old certainties
then imposed by the straight jacket of the Cold War
were fading then too.
But the post Cold War landscape, as we saw it,
herald at a much more promising future
than we can foresee today.
So today's graduate diplomats like indeed, all of us
work in a world marked
by wars in the Middle East and Europe.
The effects of climate change,
a strategic contest in the Indo-Pacific.
Now being sharply felt in the South Pacific, a reordering
of global relationships and retreat from some of the rules
and norms that kept us safe and prosperous.
These all pose significant challenges for New Zealand.
So this is the context for the foreign policy reset.
It is why we are invigorating our relationships
with partners who share our values and interests.
It is why we are investing in regions like South
and Southeast Asia, where our economic
and security interests are becoming more significant.
It is why groups such as the Indo-Pacific four matter
is formats through which we expand our influence
by aligning fellow democracies.
It is why we've intensified our trade effort, whether
by tackling non tariff barriers with new vigor,
or as the minister said, by concluding new FDAs
as we've done with the GCC and the UAE.
And it is why we are sustaining a deep focus on the Pacific.
The challenges are acute, whether
because of the legacies of Covid climate
or geopolitics as we speak.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs is in New Caledonia.
This will be the 15th Pacific country.
He has visited since the government
took office a a year ago.
And that achievement alone, I think is testimony
or a testimony to the importance we attach
for was stable and prosperous Pacific.
Mr. Chair of Volatile World has a human consequence
for New Zealanders and for the staff of the ministry
who are working ever hard and keeping them safe.
In the year under review, we've responded to over 45,000
to Conent inquiries and provided help to more than 3000
or nearly 3000 kiwis in need overseas.
This has included deploying teams into dangerous places,
is when we provided assistance
to almost a hundred New Zealand citizens
and others to leave Israel Gaza in the West Bank.
After the seven October attacks.
It has included bringing home
over 200 people stranded in New Caledonia,
following civil unrest there in May.
And it has included a case with,
which I'm sure the committee will be familiar,
and which was resolved this year, mainly the release
of New Zealand Philip Mertons
after 592 days of captivity in Indonesia.
This case highlighted the importance of a well-resourced
and well-connected embassy in this case in Jakarta,
skilled staff in Wellington,
and great support from across the government system.
Conscious work is just one
of the diverse roles played by the ministry.
And while the work of diplomacy can sometimes see CMAR came
and often incremental, everything we do
with helping a kiwi in need overseas
or negotiating a new free trade agreement is done
to make New Zealand a safer and more prosperous.
And finally, everything we do is done
by 1,794 dedicated staff in the ministry in New Zealand
and offshore, supported by colleagues in other agencies.
Many of them do this work in challenging,
sometimes even hostile locations where they serve
with their families or sometimes separated from them.
So as a turbulent year in World affairs is draw to a close.
I especially think of our staff posted in the Middle East
in Russia and in remote parts of the Pacific.
I also think of our courageous staff who traveled
to places like Kyiv, Ramah, UBA,
Beirut, and West Par among others, so
that they can be an eye and ear
and a voice for New Zealand and New Zealanders.
I'm very proud to lead them
and all our staff in New Zealand and around the world.
Very grateful for the
committee's interest in the ministry's work.
And I now welcome the questions you no doubt have
for us from here, my colleagues. Thank you.
Wonderful. Thank you very much.
Okay, we'll move to the first section focused on
trade, Damian O'Connor.
Uh, sure. Good. Uh, congratulations.
And it's been quite an easy year, I suppose. Is it
Busy one?
Um, look, how do you think the government will double
exports and where do you think that might occur?
Well, there's an extensive program of action designed
to reach that goal.
Um, this year's achievements, including conclusions
of the FDA's with the UAE, um, uh,
and the GCC ongoing work
to enhance our training relationship with India.
Uh, a variety of actions to detect non tariff barriers, uh,
as all part of the program designed to meet that goal Van,
who may want to, to amplify on some
of those, some of those points.
Yeah, no, thank you.
Um, I mean the, the export double strategy,
there is a core element of that will
of course be negotiating, um,
and concluding free trade agreements.
And I wanted to give you a bit of a flavor of, um, the,
the past year in review.
Um, on the 21st of August, um,
the previous government signed theda upgrade, uh,
on the 24th of February, the end
of Pacific Economic f supply
chains agreement came into force.
I happy to talk a little bit more
about why that is important.
On the 26th of February, also, um, we expanded the, um,
global trade and gender agreement, uh, adding Australia
and Brazil, uh, to that agreement that was in the margins
of the WT o ministerial at the WT o ministerial.
Um, the e-commerce moratorium was, um, preserved, uh,
in other words that, um, countries are not able
to impose tariffs on, uh, digital transactions.
And Minister McClay was instrumental in that
because he was the facilitator of
that negotiation on the 1st of May.
Of course, as you heard from the minister,
the EU free trade agreement cabinet
to force on the 24th of June, two new, um,
agreements were also signed the Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework Clean Economy Agreement,
and the Fair Economy Agreement.
Two really important ones, which I know you were very
involved in yourself on the 26th of September,
as you heard from the minister, the UAE negotiations were
concluded shortly thereafter, 31st of October.
Uh, the GCC negotiations were also concluded
on the 14th of November.
Uh, we announced the launch
of work on a green economy partnership agreement on the
15th of November this year, just, uh, less than a month ago,
um, the agreement on climate change, trade
and sustainability was signed.
And on the 15th of November, we also announced, um,
the process for Peru, uh, to commence, uh,
joining an accession procedure for them
to join the digital economy, joining a, a lengthening queue
of people joining that.
And then on the 28th of November in Vancouver, um,
Costa Rica was announced as the new accession candidate, uh,
that moves now into a working group
for the CPTP negotiations.
And then there's India. Um,
and India is a really important piece of, um, piece of this
because it is a, uh, it speaks for itself in a sense.
It is such an enormous economy. Do you think we'll have
A trade deal in three years?
So you two years, uh, you heard what the minister said.
Uh, and of course my No, I, my job is to know
What you say.
My, my job is to deliver to, um,
to the government's priority. And it's very clear to me.
I know you provide the very best of advice,
Minister. I'm very focused on,
um, making sure
that we turn over every mock, uh, that we can say that.
I'm sorry, being persistent, but I, I I guess the question
around the one,
and you will have investigated a review
of trade within India.
Yeah. That, that a think tank we are told, um, is kind
of driving, working with gpa, is, can you explain that?
So yes, there is a, there is a think tank in Delhi
that is working on, um, a strategy for India.
Uh, what we dunno is the relationship between that
and what the government's going to do.
My, my focus and,
and city that of the, the minister has been very much on,
uh, building the relationship, first of all with India.
And that goes obviously well beyond the trade, uh, element.
But for me on the trade side, uh, the focus is very much on,
we are now at a distinct disadvantage
to Australia in the Indian market.
And to give you a couple of practical examples of what
that means, the tariff on sheet meat in India is 30%.
We were, uh, the, the largest supplier
of sheet meat into India.
It was very modest because the tariff constraints,
our ability to, to access that on 1st of January this year,
uh, Australia became tariff free.
So they don't pay tariff anymore.
And immediately, um, they've got,
they've enjoyed an increase of nearly just find the,
the figure here, uh, nearly a
163% since entry
and force is the increase in Australian
sheep meat exports to India.
Uh, to give you another example in wood, uh,
where we are a competitive,
theirs a tariff there is actually relatively modest
by Indian standards, it's 5%.
Um, they're up 200, 2% in horticulture, kiwi fruit,
uh, a range of, um, berries
and other products that we do see.
So, so the potential is huge.
The so do you think we'll nail it within two years?
The potential is huge,
and there is an urgency to catching up
because we want to, at the very least level,
the playing field, uh, with India, uh, sorry,
with Australia in the Indian market, um, kiwi fruit tariffs,
30%, our main competitor, Chile,
has had a free trade agreement with India, it's at 15%.
So the erosion that's happening is already very real.
So we are very focused now on, on how do we get into that,
uh, negotiation with India.
And that's a, a key priority of, of mine and the team,
and I know of the ministry to build the wider relationship
so that we can drive that forward.
But going back to the original question on, um,
export double, it's not just about negotiating
and concluding the free trade agreements,
as you know very well yourself, um, there is a lot more
to the work that we do on export double.
Um, and part of that is the negotiation of rules.
Uh, so trade agreements, uh,
working in the World Trade Organization,
it's also about working on norms.
And it's really important to remember the value of the norms
that things like the IP agreement that APEC provides us,
those norms are the things
that actually deliver us the
actual benefits of trade agreements. I
Appreciate it. Sorry to
intervene, but I mean, I mean,
you have told many audiences around the country
that the golden days have kind of free trade of.
We are facing, um, you know, some headwinds here.
So there's some geopolitical shifts we've seen in Korea
and recent, you know, the last couple of days
of course some, some chaos and other big market for us.
So I guess, you know, a a an honest assessment of
a 7% growth compounding growth in exports required
for double exports.
And, and it's not that we don't want
to have the aspirational goal,
but a realistic goal to, to indicate to,
to New Zealand export is, is probably what they need.
So part of the story is going to be, so yes,
7% in preventable growth is what we need
to do over the next 10 years to reach export double.
So from 95 billion to a hundred
and, uh, 195, uh, 190 billion.
So that's a significant shift.
And we do know from pre covid days, the decade back, um,
that we were growing in a rather more benign
environment at around 4%.
So this is a significant target,
but the way we are focusing the resource,
and I I wanna make the observation that
what we do in the ministry, foreign affairs
and trade is only one part
of the lever that needs to get pulled.
There's important levers that get pulled out of treasury,
out of mb things like infrastructure, education, science,
and innovation research.
All those are really critical enablers of our ability
to meet the, the export double target.
But in addition to the negotiation, um,
we do have the expansion of agreements.
So cptp is a great example, expanded
to now include the United Kingdom.
Now we're working on Costa Rica succession,
digital economy partnership agreement.
Korea is already a member
and we're adding, you know, there's eight other, uh,
economies in the, in the queue to join that.
So the expansion piece is really important.
Then there's the implementation piece.
And the implementation part
of the ministry's work is critical
because we know from OECD research that you can lose up
to 40% of the value of a free trader group
through poor implementation.
And we really do need to focus on what that looks like
because we estimate,
and we don't have very good data on this,
but we estimate that we're losing nearly a quarter
of a billion dollars per year in a handful of sectors
that we've looked at, because people are not using the
tariff preferences that were negotiated.
So give you a couple of practical examples.
Mussels, the tariff in Mexico on mussels is 20%
that was eliminated seven years ago.
We are concerned that all businesses,
all seafood industry are not picking up
and using the, the value of
what was negotiating, uh, negotiated.
We know that the tariff in on hokey into Japan,
a really important market, 11%, we estimate that 50 to 60%
of the businesses there are still paying the
tariff That's on us.
We've got to be better at explaining the, the agreement.
Mm, highlighting the fact that it's not just
for the beef industry or for the dairy industry
or for the big end of town,
but is really important for all
of these other sectors, uh, to get as well.
We simply cannot afford to leave that money on the table.
And that's a core part of
how you achieve export double is the, I've got,
I've got more, but I, I, I know
I appreciate that of that, that
and your enthusiasm to pass those
really important messages on.
But I, there's a limited time.
I could come back to another area shift
and some may see that signing up to X is a barrier
to trade rather than the facilitation, um, process that is
that, um, you know, we're gonna put more
conditions on our interaction with other, other, uh,
trading markets and the emerging issue
or word of inclusion, which is in line
with our trade for policy.
But there are some exporters
and some people who think that these, these new
and emerging, um, non-car barriers
or values that are brought into trade our problem for us.
Can you explain, you know,
what is happening across the world of trade
with the word inclusion?
So maybe to make a couple of, I did wanna pick up the
point on the agreement on climate change, trade
and sustainability, because that is
absolutely not a barrier, it's an enabler
and it's a critical one for us.
And I know I'm appearing in front of the committee next week
to talk in more detail about acts,
but just make the obvious point.
It's a trade agreement that is going
to remove tariffs it on more than 300 environmental, uh,
goods, including wood and um, wool.
So for the first time, wood
and wool are recognized formally in an international treaty.
So key priorities of ours since forever, um,
as environmental goods.
And this agreement is going to lower the price
of environmental technologies for all of those countries
that, that join it.
So that means that the price
of those technologies will be lowered.
It means that there'll be a better
uptake of those technologies.
Hopefully that will also, I mean, trade theory tells us
that will also drive innovation.
And we also know that a key part of the big challenge
that we face in climate change is also the
subsidization of fossil fuels.
If this agreement is the first one, also to address
that in the same way
that New Zealand pioneered the work on agricultural reform
in the World Trade Organization focusing on agricultural
subsidies, that's what we're trying
to do in the fossil fuel subsidies pillar
of the agreement on climate
change, trade and sustainability.
To go to your point on, on inclusion,
it is absolutely the case that one
of the big challenges we face is
that social license is increasingly fragile internationally.
Huge process in the EU around agriculture,
big protests in India about some of the reforms
that the Indian government was proposing, um,
that you may remember them yourself from, uh,
the times you were visiting there.
And the huge sensitivity that there is.
And in the United States
and many of the OECD economies,
there is deep skepticism about trade and trade agreements
and how we, uh, make sure those benefits come back.
And so that's been a big focus for us, continues
to be making sure that this, that the benefits of trade
go back generally back into, uh, the New Zealand economy.
And they benefit all parts of the New Zealand economy,
whether it's small or medium enterprises,
the regions of New Zealand.
I was recently at the, um, bay of plenty, uh, city council.
They invited me to come and speak about
how important trade is to that region.
How many jobs depend on that.
Two and four jobs in that region depend on exports.
It's critical for us. One in four New Zealand jobs
across the, across the country.
Uh, if you are in an export focused industry, you're
between, uh, 10
and 12% better wages are being paid
in your, in your company.
That's all work that's available on the,
on the ministries website.
You're 32% more productive if you're
an export focused industry.
These are key drivers, not only
of our export double strategy,
but also about wider economic growth, uh, agenda.
But we've gotta make sure that the benefits are fully felt.
If you think about the Maori economy, for example, 60
to $70 billion conservative estimate, significant
focus in the primary industries,
but also really interesting in
the software and digital space.
So those elements are critical enablers, again, of
where our export double growth is, is gonna come from.
And if you look at what we've tried
to do in our trade rooms, we are trying
to set enabling frameworks that enable
and facilitate that access.
So Maori trade, economic cooperation,
if you think about the work that we try
to make sure on small and medium enterprises,
if you think about the fact that in C-P-T-V-P, the EU FTA,
the UK FTA, we've got chapters on good regulatory practice
about trying to reduce the transaction cost of business,
cut red tape, make it easier to do business.
If you look at what we've done in the Asian Australia
and New Zealand free trade agreement, uh,
where we've introduced, uh, where we successfully negotiated
with them that
before the agreement we,
the original agreement in 2008 was a 48 hour
customs clearance procedure.
It was groundbreaking at the time.
And the answer to upgrade signed last year, it's six hours.
That gives New Zealand exporters a massive advantage,
six hour custom clearance when we know from EU research
that it can take up to four days for them
to clear customs across their as economies.
We've got an, a commitment for perishable
and chill products to cross the border within six hours.
That is a significant benefit.
And again, it's all about reducing that retake.
And I don't wanna pretend that it's just the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs that does this work.
It's our customs colleagues,
it's our NPI colleagues, it's NZTE.
It's a cross agency effort that's designed
to really focus on, on this area and really drive growth.
So that is a, a really important part of our export,
um, double strategy. Alright,
We'll come now to Dana Kirkpatrick.
Thank you. Um, my question is about export control permits,
um, which is probably a bit more granular,
but uh, I'm just interested, I know in your, um,
performance indicators that you issued, uh,
more this past year than in previous years.
So well done. That's great.
Uh, I'm interested though in how many were turned down,
if that's possible and the value,
Uh, joined by Paula Wilson, who's the deputy secretary
with expertise in this area.
But whether we have data on what's been declined
and I'm not sure, but
As I understand it, three were turned down,
three permits were turned down and one was revoked.
But I don't know the value
and I don't think we comment on the value
because it's commercially sensitive information.
Okay. Yeah, we did put a report on our
website just in November.
I think that's probably where you got the stat about
exports having increased permits having increased. Well
I actually, your annual report.
Mm-Hmm. Okay. Um, so, uh, just a supplementary, that's all.
Um, can you give us just some idea
of why permits would be turned down?
I have to remind myself what the criteria are,
but we, um, we look at, we have
to look at whether an export would contribute to
breaking international law,
in which case it would be turned down.
Mm-Hmm. If we think it might be used to
go against international humanitarian law in particular.
And we have to look at New Zealand's National Security
and at our reputation.
So there's a range of factors that we look at,
they're looked at on a case by case basis.
It would depend on exactly what the good is
that's being exported and the destination and the end user.
'cause it obviously differs between a military end user
versus a civilian end user.
Okay, great. So it's quite hard to predict ahead of time,
I guess, is the point for business.
It's a bit hard to predict ahead of time exactly
what will be approved and
Three is about average.
Is it? I mean, hard, hard to tell, I guess depending on
what, what applications you get,
But I'm not sure.
Sorry. I do know that that report
that went on the website in November, that went through all
of our export export controls permits,
and there was one the previous year as well,
sort of an annual report.
So I'd have to go back and look at the folder one
to see whether the three was average or above or below.
Okay. Thank you. That's supplementary. Yeah.
Supplementary on that one.
Um, export controls, uh, do you, was some work going
with the NPI and I, I presume in conjunction with yourselves
around the ability to bring in legislation that would,
would enable intervention, should there be an export
of a product that, as you said, puts at risk our reputation?
This is primarily an era of, of, um, uh,
primary industries around food, et cetera.
So if we are, so the question will be what progress, if any,
is still being made on this?
If we know that volumes of wine
or honey are being exported, they are then being adulterated
or diluted, and we know that,
that potentially plays into our reputation internationally.
Mm. As I understand, there's currently no ability
to intervene, and there, there was investigation
of whether there should be similar
to other regimes around the
world. Is there progress on that?
So it wouldn't be under the export controls system
that your colleague was just asking about,
but Bangali, do you know
That? So, so there is, um,
yeah.
So there is, there is work as you know, around Monica Honey.
Um, there was work done some time ago to try to establish
what we would certify as, um, as Monica Honey.
Uh, and I know that MPI has done work,
and it's a question really for them, um, on
where the best places to, to kind of do that would be one
of the areas that you would've had the minister this morning
talk about was the EU deforestation regulation
and what assurances would need to be
provided in order to get us through that.
Because that is gonna be one of the really big challenging,
I mean, speaking of non tariff barriers, that's one
of the really very significant ones, uh, that we
Confront.
Can I just off off that,
because I, I, I understand the technical kind
of complexities of it, especially if you're
talking about free or trade.
But, but if, if we're talking about reputation,
not just provision of, um, goods
and services to contribute to, um, unrest
or, you know, um, illegal military action Mm-Hmm.
But in fact, to the provision of, of adulteration
or, um, fraudulent activities across the food supply chain,
do you think that it's an area that,
that we need to investigate further?
And, and if so, how would that be done?
It's not non tariff barrier.
Sure. Well, so, so look,
there are a number of angles into,
uh, in, into this question.
One is, uh, what's the role of private standards?
How do you balance the right of the consumer
to know against the potential for something to become a,
uh, a non tariff barrier?
So, to give you an example, um, one
of the powerful monopsony effects at the moment
that we see internationally, US and, uh, European
and UK markets is the power
of supermarkets who set a standard.
And it's a voluntary standard, and it's a private standard.
So in other words, we as a government
or the New Zealand government, is not able to prosecute
a supermarket in the way
that we would if it was a government.
So if we thought, if there was a discriminatory label, uh,
a labeling program established, um,
that effectively kept us off the supermarket shelf,
the challenge we then face is our normal mechanisms free
trade agreement, raising it at the World Trade Organization,
uh, through the committee structures that we might have, um,
at the, at the OECD
or Indeed through apec,
depending on whether, where the issue is.
None of those can be used when you have a supermarket
that's exerting that kind of power,
because effectively they're saying you
can't be on the shelf unless you meet.
It's of course a voluntary standard.
So one of our challenges is how do you provide the assurance
as a government, where would you intervene
and how would you think about that?
What's the trade off that you need
to be, um, thinking about?
We have plenty of unfortunate examples of being caught out
by, um, uh, supermarkets who install a particular thing,
which looks like a great idea to them,
but then limits the ability of, uh, New Zealand to,
to provide, um, a particular product.
Because often the one size fits all approach, uh,
is not an appropriate approach.
No. Which, which might be considered kind
of free trade under return,
but then you come back to the reality of that dilemma.
Do you think it is wise for us to progress legislation
that does allow us to intervene?
If, if I go back to you on the,
on the point about free trade, I mean,
it is really important to remember that there is,
that the monopsony power of these supermarkets is enormous.
So if they set up a standard that, for example,
and this, this is one that has occurred
as admittedly some time ago, where they said, in order
to meet the sustainability standard
and to be on my shelf, you need to demonstrate
that you have a Stonewall maintenance program.
Now, farmers in a particular part
of the world do have those Stonewall maintenance program.
They have stonewalls. That's how they manage their flocks.
But that is not something
that's an appropriate in a, in a New Zealand context.
We don't have stonewalls, we don't have
Stonewall maintenance programs.
So that is a one size fits all.
That seems to work perfectly on the desktop
where it was designed but not
so effective in the, in the market.
Even though as, as you know, very well from our work, um,
on the UK, FTA, uh, where our standards are, uh,
certainly the way in which we achieve those standards may be
different, but we have similar outcomes.
I I don't wanna terms s mr.
Chairman if I can, but it is, uh, as we ask our exporters
to double the value of everything they do,
and some of it will be based on reputation, integrity,
supply chain, credibility, et cetera.
If we have a foreign company
that produces a product in New Zealand, ships it offshore,
and then, um, packages it up
and sells it with some inherent risks at some state,
it might not be food safety, but it might be reputational.
Should we have an ability, given all the hard work we do
to try and intervene
and prevent that export occurring in the first place?
I think it's really important to distinguish between,
you know, a food safety standard where
of course we do provide assurances
and we are absolutely focused on, again,
I don't wanna tread into API's area,
but that is where we do provide certification assurance. So
One's been mixed with the Australian wines, for example.
So once you get into that space,
you are now opening a very wide category.
And of course, the thing we've gotta think about
is how does that work?
If we start doing this, what happens
if other people start doing it?
And it does run into that risk that I mentioned,
the one size fits all approach
and the new distortion that provides into the system
that then becomes an additional transaction cost
for New Zealand business offshore.
Okay. So it is a, it is a real trade
off that we have to think about.
Yep. Sorry, the supplementary from Tiano to io.
Um, Kiara, just sort of going back to the line, um, line
of question that Dana was on, just around those, uh,
three applications
that were declined under the export controls regime.
Uh, is there, is, is, are you able
to provide more detail on that?
Like, for example, what was the, like the end location
or the industry, um, and that kind of detail?
I don't have the information with me, I'm afraid,
and as I said, we tend not to
because they're commercially, it's commercial
and confidence information where a company is sought
to sell something and we've prevented them from doing so
by not issuing the export permit.
So we don't actually comment publicly on the destination
or the kind of good, in terms of the kind of good though,
it will be a dual use item.
So something that could be used either for civilian purposes
or for military purposes.
And it will be a good, that's on the New Zealand strategic
goods list, which is somewhere out there in public,
um, under the Gazette.
Okay. And what, what kind of, um, uh, criteria
do, do you have to kind of determine
what gets on the, on the no list?
We belong to various international discussions where
there are, so the ANA arrangement, the Australia Agreement,
there are international discussions that identify the goods,
which can be used for dual purposes,
which could be used either for civilian or military.
Normally we rely on those discussions to result in agreement
that certain goods should be added to the list.
That's how we've operated until very recently.
We have found that recently Russia in particular is
preventing those discussions from reaching agreement.
So we and various other partners have agreed
to add a very small number of goods
to our New Zealand's strategic goods list
because we believe they can be used for military purposes,
but we are unable to reach agreement in those
international discussions.
That's an exception to the rule
that's normally followed though, where we only add things
to the list where there's been that inter international
discussion and everyone has agreed that
that particular technology should be added to the list.
Thank you. Sorry on that.
Are other countries doing that as well then?
They are, yes. Various of our, various
of our partners are doing that as well.
We all agree that
because there are new technologies, like for example, around
artificial intelligence, which could be used
for nefarious purposes, that we needed to be able to
regulate their export.
Even though the international discussions, as I say,
haven't been able to reach agreement largely
because of various disruptive forces like Russia,
Obviously there can be a lot of potential benefits from
that technology as well.
Yes, there could if used properly.
Yeah, That's right. But if not used properly
or used by an end user
who we are concerned about like an armed force
that's waging a war, for example, yeah, then we would want
to be able to control the export. So
Then would it not be more appropriate to control
who it's been exported to rather than the export
of the product itself?
Well, we look at both. So we look at whether it's going
to a military end user, then it's subject
to the catchall control.
So it doesn't matter what good you're exporting,
if it's going to a military
or security end user, you'll need a permit.
But if it's a deal use good, which is definitely going
to be used for military purposes,
then it's also on the New Zealand strategic goods list
and you also need a permit.
So we look at both what good is and where it's going
Supplementary on that.
Um, ha have you, uh, so if,
if exporters were already exporting, uh, to I guess,
you know, other countries and, and the goods, um, have,
have things changed
that would give you a different view on whether
or not a license would be, um, applied?
Certainly things that were being exported to Russia
before it invaded Ukraine,
probably less problematic than the goods
that might be exported to Russia now, for example.
So yes, if the world changes, we take
that into account. Yeah.
Thank you. Are we, what about
If the end location is Israel, would that reply as well?
We haven't issued any export permits for exports
to Israel since we had,
since we've been recording the data effectively.
So since 2006 for the last 18 years.
So for example, it's going through the US
and then ending up over there.
If it's going through a third country,
they still need an export permit if it's going
to a military end user.
And companies know that.
Just on a supplementary one too.
Um, do we know of anything that may have gone to the US
that has ended up being used in the genocide in either Gaza
or in Sudan?
As I say, even if it's going through a third country,
if the exporting company has reason to believe it's going
to be exported on,
or it's going to be used in a good that's going
to be used in those places, they have
to get an export permit from us.
So they need to tell us
You've not turned anything down or not aware of anything.
No, we haven't seen any evidence that that's happening.
Okay. Next question, Dan.
Oh, thank you. So, um, moving on to non tariff barriers,
uh, for exporters.
And, um, I note that, uh,
in 2024 you resolved, uh, 14
non tariff barriers, uh, with a value of $190 million,
which is excellent work.
Uh, I would just be interested in understanding
what those were that were resolved.
Please, as you know,
we have a specific interest in this topic at the moment.
So, so I know you'd been given a briefing by some of my,
um, uh, some, some of the ministry staff along with MPI, um,
and I won't repeat that.
Um, but to give you some examples without, uh,
being particularly specific about particular country, um,
the examples included change of packaging.
So in other words, the, the non tariff barrier was
that midway through a season, um,
a a country changes the rules by which the size
of the package, uh, became longer and narrower.
Uh, which of course meant for several months people had
to rejig their, the way the packaging plant was done.
And it was hard not to feel cynical about the reason
that was, that was done.
Mm-Hmm. Um, then there was one, uh,
around berries being exported.
Uh, and the particular labeling requirements changed twice,
uh, with, as far as we could tell no science-based reason
for those changes.
And again, that was part of our effort to then to, uh,
to deal with, um, that,
and I did wanna make an observation about
how we tackle this work.
'cause it goes to, um, the export double strategy.
'cause that is a key part of the work.
As you said, 190 million,
we are tracking just under $10 billion worth of, uh,
non tariff measures, which are affecting New Zealand
exporters now.
Mm-hmm. More than a hundred, uh, nearly 200, uh,
non tariff, as you said.
Mm-Hmm. There's essentially five ways that we do this.
And then I wanna talk about another non tariff barrier,
which is subsidies, uh, which we often ignore, um,
but is a really important
and significant distortion, particularly
for a primary producer and a primary exporter like us.
So the five elements are this, first of all,
we progress non tariff barriers.
We look to address them through bilateral approaches,
and that tends to be, um, we get a, a company comes
to us and says, look, we've got a problem.
Uh, and we have a, there's a no no wrong door policy for us.
MPI, MB customs, anyone who registers a non tariff barrier,
it appears on all of our systems.
We then come together to, to link to, um, to think about
how we're gonna lean in to address that,
that non tariff measure.
So the first element is sort of at that working level.
Then there's a question of
how do we tackle this in the country?
So country X in the capital, we have an embassy, uh,
we make representations at a working level.
Mm-Hmm. Then as the problem continues,
or, uh, we judge it necessary, it could be the ambassador
that gets, um, drafted into to prosecute, uh, change,
then ministers get involved.
So you've got this escalation step, sort
of classical diplomatic strategy to, to address a challenge.
That's the bilateral piece.
Then we have really important to remember,
the free trade agreements aren't just about the removal
of tariffs, uh, and the commitments we get there.
They also have institutional structures that are designed
for us to have legal mechanisms whereby we can raise
questions this short, short
of dispute settlement, short of enforcement.
But where we have an opportunity
in the Ian Australia New Zealand free Trader group,
there's the goods committee in the EU and the uk.
Um, there's structured to engage on possible,
uh, non tariff barriers.
So we have the, the free trader agree,
give us a legal mechanism to raise a question
and to seek transparency, to understand what's the science
behind this, what is driving this,
and then essentially to try to get that broken down.
The third way we do it is
through other international organizations
that are effectively norm building institutions.
So, for example, apec APEC has a very large program
of work on non tariff barriers.
All 21 of us agreed in November, uh,
just a couple months ago, that
that work on non tariff barriers needs
to be accelerated given what we are collectively seeing,
uh, across the world.
And that work is often easy to forget how important it is,
because what it does, it builds trust
and confidence amongst each other.
So I often think about the APEC work
that was done more than a decade ago, that built the trust
and confidence that has allowed customs.
And this is the work of the customs agency about recognized
economic operators where they're able to, uh,
certify particular people for export and for import both us
and our APEX colleagues
to move product more quickly across the border.
So Apex the third, the fourth area is of course,
the World Trade Organization.
And again, we talk about the WGO having troubles,
but one of the most active committees is the Technical
Barriers to Trade committee and the SAN
and Fi sanitary, uh, committee.
Both of those committees are ones we use extremely actively,
uh, to raise the problem of non tariff barriers
with the wide leadership of the 166, uh, WT O members.
That's an opportunity then also
for us to caucus with others.
And we discover often that they have the same problem as us,
and then we have a community of us
who then lean in and race.
And this the effect of sunlight.
Um, it's, uh, what, uh,
professor ti once called the Vampire the Dracula Effect,
put sunlight on it, and lo and behold it goes away.
And we do find that up to 15 to 20% of, uh,
our first interventions there do have a meaning impact,
changing the course of the way in which a non taric
barrier, uh, is deployed.
Look, the final step, the fifth
step is of course enforcement.
Uh, and we are having to look at enforcement of our rights,
uh, through whether it's a free trade agreement
or it's the World Trade Organization.
I know we're coming to the World Trade Organization next,
so I won't speak too much about that.
But to say, as Canada has discovered, we are very determined
that if we do see a non tariff barrier, in this case,
the way in which a tariff, uh, quota is being administered,
we regard that as unfair.
We regarded that as unfair
and discriminatory, uh, the panel agreed with us,
and we are now in the process of enforcing our
rights, uh, with Canada.
So that's the, the non tariff barrier piece.
It's easy sometimes to forget, though,
that the subsidies dimension is an additional
distortion in the system.
And let me give you a couple of examples of, um,
how significant those distortions are.
For the agriculture sector alone,
it's roughly half a billion, um, sorry, $500 billion.
By 2030, the W2 estimates the figure will have
risen to 1 trillion.
That's $1 trillion worth of taxpayers money
that goes into subsidizing the, the activities
of other farmers that makes their product cheaper
and makes them more competitive
through this unfair advantage.
Mm-Hmm. Just wanna make a little observation about that.
That 78% of that nearly, uh,
500 billion, it's actually just over 500 billion
is actually done by four economies.
There's 166 members of the WT O,
but four of them a account for nearly 80% of the subsidies
that are introduced into the system.
It's the usual suspects, US eu,
but it's also China and India.
These are significant distortions in the system,
and it's not just agriculture.
We've got fossil fuel subsidies
just under a trillion dollars.
And we've got fish subsidies, which we're trying to deal
with as, um, honorable conval remember, uh, $22 billion.
These are significant distortions that really
tilt the playing field against us in a way
that is extremely, uh, challenging.
And it's, I, I, I really do want people to remember
that the non tariff barriers one thing,
but the subsidies are incredibly difficult, uh,
and challenging to deal with,
but they are a really important component
of the non tariff barrier challenge we face.
We've always thought of subsidy reform as being about trade,
uh, and about development, you know, the,
the way in which this really, um, paralyzes, uh,
the development prospects of developing countries
because of the subsidized product
that they simply can't compete with.
I think a new element to this that we're gonna have
to really think seriously about is the environmental harm
of these subsidies as well.
So if you think about agriculture, for example,
water use fertilizer, use that additional subsidies
that remove, uh, the incentive for farmers
to be thinking carefully about how they're using that simply
because they're being paid these colossal sums, um,
and the damage that does the environment.
I think that is the new dimension that we need
to bring into the discussion on, um,
whether it's in the World Trade Organization or indeed.
And really interesting to bear in mind that in C-P-T-P-P,
there is a fish subsidies discipline, a set of disciplines
that binds the, the 12 of us in a really serious way.
So it's the first trade agreement that's tried
to grapple with trade and environment.
And then of course, and I know I'm talking about it
next week, so we'll stop here.
The agreement on climate change, trade
and sustainability, which is the first attempt
to deal a discipline, uh, fossil fuel of subsidies.
Fantastic. Thank you,
Bill. Yeah, just on, on
the WTO piece,
'cause it's under the same section, um,
can you give us an update on how that's going?
Obviously, we still don't have a
functioning dispute settlement system
that sense some concern.
Can you give us some insight around that specifically and
therefore the effectiveness ongoing?
Yeah, so, um, look, the, the WTO, um,
is a really critical part of our system,
and I think every New Zealander knows
how important it's been in terms of, uh, non-discrimination
of New Zealand exporters, uh, providing us certainty,
providing us transparency.
But it is true that it has, certainly, it's had better days,
but I do wanna emphasize it's had better days
in the negotiating function.
But for the reasons I want to talk about today, I think
that it's important to remember
that it's had some significant successes.
So some of the recent ones are the trade facilitation
agreement, 2013 2016 was the elimination
of agricultural export subsidies critical
for us in Abu Dhabi.
This year, the e-commerce moratorium, uh, was rolled over.
In other words, we did not go backwards.
And at the moment, that is actually a success
amongst the 166 members, uh, there, that we agreed not
to impose new tariffs on digital transactions.
But the classical elements of the WTO are really
around the dispute settlement mechanism, agriculture
and fish in particular.
There are other elements, but those are the three big
components that we're still very focused on
and that we are, that are very much alive, uh, negotiation,
including, uh, next week in Geneva.
I did wanna make a couple of observations on, um,
the dispute settlement mechanism.
Uh, yes, it is true, um, that, uh, the dispute settlement
function is now we're not able to use the appeals process
because there are not enough appellate body members
as they're called kind of judges, if you like,
um, to hear those cases.
That is a significant blow.
And we do see, uh, countries, um, quote,
appealing into the void, which means they simply, uh,
they might lose the case, but then they appeal
and it goes into, uh, this non world.
It's really important to remember, I think that this was,
uh, this is a longstanding policy of the United States.
Um, I was in Geneva at the time when President Obama, uh,
refused to join the first consensus on a reappointment of a,
uh, a member of the appellate body.
And as the minister said, there are long founded concerns.
We share those concerns.
Uh, we share many of the concerns that the United States has
around, um, around the dispute settlement mechanism.
But all but all is not lost on the,
on the dispute settlement mechanism.
Because what we've put in place instead is what's called the
multi-party interim arrangement.
And the multi-party interim arrangement, um,
has covers nearly 58% of global trade.
Uh, so there's nearly 50 members, uh, in it, in the wt o in,
sorry, in the multi-party interim agreement.
And essentially, it functions
as a shadow appellate body system.
And it's already been used, uh, in the EU Columbia case.
Uh, Columbia took a case, um, uh, the panel,
the WTO panel ruled against, uh, Columbia.
Columbia appealed, they went
to the multi-party interim arrangement because the EU
and Columbia are both in it.
And Columbia did lose that case,
but we were able to demonstrate
that the system is functioning
because we've created this additional system.
Now, unfortunately, some key members,
obviously the United States, uh, is not a member.
Uh, so that, that is obviously an ongoing challenge,
including for us, because we were a third party on the case
on steel aluminum, uh, that the minister also mentioned, uh,
that the US has appealed into the void.
So the district settlement function, it still works,
it doesn't have the appeal system,
but we built this kind of safety net underneath it to try
to support, uh, that on agriculture.
Um, there are three strands to that negotiation.
There's the classical agricultural subsidies one,
and I gave you some of the data on, um, on that.
There's two other elements that are very challenging.
This what's called the special safeguard mechanism,
and then something called the public stock
holding, uh, system.
And the challenge of those two is how do you agree a system
that potentially clause back some of the existing, uh,
WTO agreements that are in place, for example,
on public stock holding, what's the relationship
between public stock holding
and the, um,
the discipline on eliminating agricultural export subsidies?
So those are some of the quite big challenges
that we have to grapple with there.
Then there's the fish subsidies, uh, agreement.
The fish subsidies agreement is essentially in
two parts. Can I, can
I just intervene because I know I,
the public stockholding one is a really interesting one that
is quite significant for India.
Maybe can you better explain it in layperson's
Terms, van gay?
'cause I think it's, it is quite important how
that affects Yeah.
International trade. So, so public stock holding is a,
a perfectly legitimate activity
that many economies, uh, engage in.
It's a system whereby you, um,
you purchase stock on the open market for commercial rates,
you store it, um,
and then you release it into the market at points when you,
um, feel there is a concern amongst your population.
Uh, about supply of rice, for example, is one
of the classical, uh, elements of the public stock holding,
uh, system, not just in India,
but in a number of, uh, a number of countries.
So that is a entirely valid food security concern.
The question, uh, that WTO members
have raised about Arctic Stock Holding is what happens if
that product is then released into other markets
and competes and then unfairly
because it's at a lower price with other people
that are competing, um, in that particular product.
So that's the, that's public stock audit.
So it goes to the heart of the food security question,
which is a very real concern for all of us.
And then it's about how does that, uh,
how do you mitigate the risk of, um,
introducing another distortion into the system
that would violate the, um,
the W2 O discipline on agricultural export subsidies,
but the on fish subsidies, um, we have, um, two agreements,
one that's already been included,
and that was very much thanks to your efforts, um, uh,
on O'Connor on, um, in Geneva, uh,
that the challenge we face in the fish subsidies agreement
is that we need to have 111 ratifications of the,
of the WT O membership in order
to bring that agreement to force.
We only have 87, so even nearly three years later,
we are well short still of reaching
that magical number of 111.
Um, and one of the big challenges we face is persuading, uh,
developing countries in particular,
including our Pacific colleagues, that they,
that this's an agreement that's worth joining.
It is an agreement that tackles one of the big problems,
not the only problem, but one of the big problems of, um,
fish subsidization, which is the subsidization, um, of,
for example, um, illegal fishing
and fishing on the high seas.
So two quite big activities that account for nearly 30%,
actually it's around 25% of, um, the overfishing
and over capacity on global fish stocks.
So that's quite a significant element.
But the second, what's known as fish two,
the fish subsidies agreement number two, um,
there is a text, um, unfortunately we're still not,
there are some gaps between us
and a number of critical members to try to finish that one,
but that would really add, uh, a significantly
to the disciplines that we have around this.
It would remove a big distortion for New Zealand fish
and seafood exporters.
It would mean a significant price improvement
for us internationally,
but critically too, it would help us manage the big
and emerging challenge that we have in the,
what looks like a very, uh, collapsing global fish stock.
The last thing I wanted to mention on the WTO,
because I've talked about the sort of the formal parts
of the agreed agenda amongst 166 members, um,
it's really important to remember
that the WTO is making significant forward momentum
in particular areas where groups
of countries have come together to work with 'em.
They're called, um, the joint statement initiatives,
one's on domestic Regulation and services.
This is the idea that you should design your services regime
as transparently as possible
and have a mechanism by which, uh,
countries can engage you if you,
if they think it's discriminatory.
In that one, we have 70, 72 members, um,
signed up on that one.
Uh, then we have the e-commerce, uh, agreement, so a set
of digital rules that would govern 91 WTO members.
And we have the investment, uh, facilitation
for development agreement.
Hundred and 26 WTO members are part of that, uh, agreement.
So these are important WTO agreements that we're looking
to progress there that would help New Zealand exporters.
If you're a services exporter, if you're a software
or digital or financial technology exporter,
the e-commerce agreement will at least set you some basic
rules, uh,
and against discrimination for you and some transparency.
And then the investment facilitation for development, uh,
that is a really important agreement for a number
of our colleagues in the Pacific as well.
So we are very committed to all of those elements.
All right. As a supplementary from Tiano to,
Actually, my question was about what's up with the fish?
And you've, you've, you've answered that, so I I I'm good.
Probably the other part of that is you also talked about
like, um, struggles with the digital, digital inclusion,
digital technology.
And so I was wondering if you had had a bit more on that
and, and, and, and, and if there is a bit more around, uh,
how much the de declining fish stocks play in the issues
that you're having around fisheries
S So, yeah, so on, um, on, on your,
on your question on, on fish, the, um,
I, I think it's fair to say fish,
fish one is a really important contribution,
but it's not, it's not enough by itself.
The, the intention was always to have one mega agreement
that would bring the two pieces together,
but unfortunately we were only able
to conclude one part of that.
So that became the Fish one treaty,
and then we've got the FISH two treaty,
and that would address, um, the over capacity
and overfishing problem.
And that is probably by far the most significant form
of subsidization that occurs internationally,
and that has the most damaging effect on, um,
uh, on global fish.
So, so depending on whose figures you believe,
but the FAO for example, estimates, the 35%
of the fish sock is overfished and over capacity already.
Uh, we know that's even more pronounced in the Pacific
region, which of course we know a series of our partners
as well as we depend on, um, for this as well.
But that, that is proving to be very difficult indeed
to secure agreement because of the tension between developed
and developing countries about transition times, um,
whether it's Pacific exemptions would be allowed,
and if you're allowed an exemption for how long
and at what point you'd be brought back into the agreement.
And that's very much a live negotiation
at the moment in Geneva.
So there will be meetings next week where there is some hope
that we, that we might find a way
into a landing zone on this.
But this is, I mean, this is an urgent, uh, problem.
Uh, it goes to the heart of the WTOs ability to,
to craft rules, but it is also, you know,
a significant trading and environment agreement given
that it touches on, on fish stocks
and development, uh, as well.
Very good. Alright, we've got time for one quick question,
very move on to the next briefly, and I hate doing this
because I have a new job.
You understand it and ask you a paty is terrible,
but you did mention, uh, the Canadian dispute
and can you give, uh, an update on the timeline,
the likely on the dairy dispute?
Yeah, so, um, nice little note here. Someone
Good, I've got you cluster, right?
That's looking for the them to read out.
Very hard to do that. You can see how hard it's, right.
So, so it's a highly filing system momentarily,
As you can see. Yeah.
Oh, here it is. It's front of the top.
Um, So yeah, look, thanks for,
um, asking that question.
It is a, it is a really important, um, test of CPTP.
Uh, this case, as you know,
it was launched from the previous government, um, at stake.
It involves 16, um, tariff, eight quotas,
and they range, they cover a whole range of products, uh,
milk products, cheese, uh, butter, um, milk powders as well.
It's about three point. I mean,
the quotas themselves are really important to us.
More than a hundred million dollars
worth of trade is involved.
It's only 3.3% of the Canadian market.
So it gives you a sense of
how protected the Canadian market is.
Now these 16, uh, tariff rate quotas,
each has a different administrative procedure.
They have a different, uh, way of managing, um, access.
And there, there are normally four ways
that the Canadians do this through the use of, um,
providing quota to processes, to further processes
to distributors, and then potentially to retailers.
Now, what they have not done, uh, they've limited it,
and the panel finding is that they've, uh, not been, uh,
not implemented this in keeping with, um,
C-P-T-B-P obligations.
Um, they've allocated the bulk of it to, uh,
domestic Canadian processes.
So they're the ones that purchased it.
And our argument has been that that has not been gone,
that has not been allowed to enter the market.
Uh, and therefore we have not been able
to get the full benefit of the agreement.
Now, the process we're in at the moment is we are now
working with Canada, uh,
through what's called the consultation phase,
which technically ended a couple of days ago.
Uh, and the, the consultation phase is designed for both
of us to see if there is a way to find a solution
to the administrative procedures that would work,
would give us the access that we believe we've been denied,
and that we believe the panel found in our favor on,
and that they believe, uh, would be a fair way
to find an accommodation.
The minister also met in Vancouver with Minister ing, uh,
last, so last week or the week before.
Um, they had a, a good constructive conversation,
but no resolution to this.
Officials were directed to keep working on this,
and the teams are certainly working, uh,
and I believe both sides are, I mean, the G 70 economy,
that they are certainly going to, um,
abide by the rules of the game.
Uh, and they're very constructively engaging with us.
But the minister's been very clear about his expectations
of us, about, uh,
how we would settle and whether we would settle.
It would really need to deliver a meaningful outcome in
accordance with what we faithfully negotiated with the CPTP
through C-P-T-P-P through quite a bit of pain. Yeah.
Excellent. All right. Thank you very much
For that. It's been a good session
on trade.
We'll move now to the Inter International
Development Cooperation Program.
Thank you. And first question from
Thanks. Yeah.
Uh, hi bead.
I used to flat with your sister Angela, so given my regards,
I will do that. Yeah.
Um, the treasury projections, uh, indicate that
by 2027, uh, New Zealand aid spending will have fallen
by about 35% from the high point.
Um, and much of that reduction is in climate aid.
Why hasn't more been budgeted, um, given, uh,
how important climate, uh,
adaptation is in the Pacific particularly,
and with the likelihood
of increasing climate related, uh, crises?
So we are in, I think, um, in the third year
of a tranche of climate finance, uh, which is new money over
and above what was already baselined in the,
in the A program for climate, uh, that climate finance, uh,
runs through until the end of calendar 2025.
And we are in the middle of budget discussions about
what the future climate finance trajectory will look like.
Mm-Hmm. And it's, it's certainly recognized that, um,
uh, climate finance is a very important, um, feature of, um,
of, of contemporary development programs. Mm-Hmm.
Have you given the government advice on the potential
reputation damage, um, for New Zealand Pacific countries
who perceive that projected, um, a reduction in
aid finance is in contradiction with our, uh, declarations
of support and friendship in the region?
Well, Pacific countries themselves, um, make that point,
uh, very clearly, um,
at the diplomatic level and at the political level.
So it's something to which, you know, ministers, um,
ministers I think are very alive.
What is the thinking behind the, um, line
by line review of the aid program? Can you talk about that?
Do you mean the activity based review?
Uh, so that, I think I'll let Bernadette fill in any
details, um, which I omit or indeed get wrong.
But that activity based review was really a, um,
a look at the aid program, um, as the train
and expenditure was being said to ensure that it aligns
with our world as we see it.
And with the government's foreign policy.
And I think that, that we call it, um,
an activity based review, uh, found that by
and large, the, A program was pointed in exactly the areas
that we would want pointed, namely that, um, around or, or,
or a little bit over 60% of our development assistance goes
to the Pacific, uh, that we need a quantum always allocated
to, uh, development needs in Southeast Asia, uh, especially
through asan, uh, that there needs
to be a humanitarian component.
Uh, and that there is always, of course,
also a multilateral component as we work with the, if FIS
and the big development banks, uh, uh, to ensure
that they can, they can do their work.
And that that line by line review as you, as you call it,
um, essentially found that, uh, the, the,
the aid program was more
or less leaning into all those areas in the right way,
but they may have more to add on that.
Yeah. kiao, good morning. Good to that.
Um, yeah, beat spot on.
I think, uh, it found we were pretty well aligned,
but it did focus it on a few areas
where it said we should do things
a little bit better or differently.
And probably a couple first was around,
we're probably doing too many things.
Uh, we have about 800 individual activities underway,
and that's actually quite hard to kind of manage
that many activities.
Uh, we are probably maybe focused in too many different
sectors, too many different places,
and we probably are working through too many partners.
So it was really a really kind of challenging us
to actually look at how do we consolidate our program given
the size of it now to make sure we are actually getting the
best possible impact, um, out of that,
um, significant spend. Hmm.
And can you say, say anything more about the criteria
that you used, um, in evaluating line by line? Mm-Hmm
Mm-Hmm. Yeah, we
went through, it was quite an exercise.
So we did go through all those 800 activities.
We basically gave it scoring based on sort of
what we thought its impact was,
what we thought its alignment was to broader government, um,
priorities, uh,
and what we thought sort of, um, the sort of the views
of our partners as well on that particular activity.
So we went through, we, you know, it,
it was fairly subjective as it's always going to need to be.
We have of course a range of evaluations and data
and evidence, which we also used,
but we looked at that at the high level.
And we've now got a whole set of recommendations for us
to sort of, as we've now started into our next funding
training, to look at how we actually kind pivot the
program in, in areas.
And that will take a little bit of time as well,
because generally you don't wanna do sort
of hard stops on some things.
If we are halfway through a program,
it will be really disruptive
for our partner if we kind of pull the plug now.
But we are starting to need to do some signaling to say,
well, actually going forward, we, this might not be a space
that we're gonna invest in, in the same way. Mm-Hmm.
And, um, were there any recommendations
arising from the review about the amount
of money being spent, any quantitative
recommendations or findings?
No. And then, to be fair, there wasn't the purpose of it.
It was really to look at what we were doing
and how well it was sort of aligning up with priorities or,
or it was, um, delivering Mm-Hmm.
And did the, uh, the impetus
for the review come from the minister
or from within the department?
It really came from the minister with sort of starting
as please talked at the very front about the, um,
foreign policy reset.
And then from that sort of cascaded a range of things down,
including into the development space.
And it was part of the minister's, I think, um, you know,
sort of commitment to the Prime minister
that he would look at Infa.
And of course, as, as you all know,
the IDC program is a big part
of the ministry's expenditure. Mm.
So part of the, the context
for initiating the review was the government's overall
commitment to cost cutting and reducing budgets,
Not for the review. We
weren't asked to sort
of look at sort of the quantum at all.
It was look more,
are we delivering against the government's priorities
and are we delivering as effectively as we can be
Supplementary law employer?
Thank you. Um, firstly, I'd like
to say I think it's a really good thing.
Respecting our taxpayers money
and making sure we're getting from
value for money is awesome.
Um, what I want to know is with that review, um,
where did you find areas where you could improve?
And does it provide opportunities
for new programs to come on board?
What are you looking at doing as far as, I guess,
some of the gaps that you've found? Yeah,
Yeah. Uh,
absolutely. And a big part was, um, I think
probably it was that doing too many
things with too many people.
So we are looking at streamlining the range of partners
that we work with, because for each partner,
then there's a whole range of sort of, um,
I guess arrangements that we have to have evaluations
and monitorings that we have to have sort
of on an individual level Mm-Hmm.
That is not necessarily, um, uh,
as effective as it could be.
And sort of, to give you an example, so for say some, uh,
governments that we work with in the Pacific,
we might have 20 different engagements with them,
and my son might be in health and some might be in education
or corrections or customs.
So we are stepping back now
and going, okay, what if there was more of an,
an umbrella arrangement with that government?
And then there were different sort of streams of work
underneath it, but then it was easier for that partner
to see, right, okay, here is the total
of New Zealand's engagement with us,
and as we shift as a, you know, as a foreign government,
maybe we wanna shift more towards, um, policing work Mm-Hmm.
Then we can sort of, they might ask us to divert more
of the resourcing into that.
So that was a, um, quite a big part of it.
The, sort of the objectives that we've been, um,
set in relation to the program
for the Pacific in particular are around governance,
improving governance, improving sort
of institution building, um, all the climate work,
as you can imagine, climate a adaptation,
and then also economic and social resilience.
Mm-Hmm. So for the headroom that we're trying to create,
they will be more shifting into some of those new areas
and sort of some of the, um,
economic development space as well.
Okay. Um, can I just stop on that?
Do you, um, do any work with any of our NGOs in some
of the climate response space?
Like, I was just thinking of taskforce Kiwi, we hosted them
recently at Parliament, um,
and they're obviously deploying in their capacity
and I dunno if there's an affiliation there,
but, um, like the type of work
that they're doing on the ground is often led by what,
when they're arriving at a scene,
what their locals are wanting.
Um, and I think that approach is really valuable.
And I'm sure quite a few of your partners do that,
but as your own engagement in that kind of thing happening
Or? Yeah, great question.
Yes, there is, we have quite a range
of, um, partnerships with a whole group of NGOs
and some are sort of, uh, the big ones, sort
of your world vision or Save the Children through to sort
of more individual, uh, NGO partnerships.
And we have an amount set aside for those partnerships.
And as you said, they often do things at a community level,
so it can be very focused on where they actually are.
Mm-Hmm. In ways that often governments are a bit more, um,
uh, just a bit harder given the scale.
I think the other area where NGOs are hugely important is
also in some of the civic spaces, some of the, um, uh, some
of the gender programs
or, um, uh, other sort of sensitive issues
for some other governments
that sometimes an NGO can have conversations
that is very hard for a government to have.
Um, and they are very good at preserving civic space
around democracy and other things.
So I think that's another
really critical role that they play.
Okay. That's great. Um,
probably just one last quick stuff,
if that's all right, Tim.
Um, so with that, and thinking about the review
and thinking about what these nations actually want Yep.
And not excluding climate change as being an issue. Yep.
Um, is your focus gonna be changing more to
what they're actually asking for
or what they're really needing, whether
that is like quality education, um, vaccinations
and things like that in their priority list,
and have you seen a change in their priorities
or, you know, what are they saying to you
that they actually want not what we're saying we want
to give, here's this money for this. Sure.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Look, that's, um, it's a, it's a really important question.
And in terms of sort of how we structure our programs
for each country, we've sort of, we've,
we've got a overarching policy statement across the top,
but the, probably one of the most significant things
that we do, which most other partners don't, is we do a, um,
a statement of partnership.
And that's a government to government level
partnership that we agree.
And it is all encompassing. It's not just about development.
It might be about things that we wanna cooperate in, in
economics there or in trades fair or security.
And with that, then under that we have these, uh,
development plans.
So it might be an individual country plan,
or it might be a sector plan.
Okay. And say a development plan,
so will do 'em with to value.
And that is jointly agreed
with the country, and you are right.
Listening is a huge part of it, is us understanding
what it is that their priority is,
but then also to us doing de conflicting
and going, okay, well actually
that might not be our biggest strength,
but that could be something that the EU are really good at.
And sort of helping kind of link them up there,
or making sure that we are not treading on each other's toes
because there's, there are so many different, uh,
partners interested in the Pacific region now.
Mm-Hmm. That theorative capacity
of those countries is pretty stretched.
And so I think a big part is
for us not making it harder for them. Mm-Hmm. That's good.
Next question. Tim Costley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, ura, what is the, what's the most significant
security and development issue facing the Pacific?
I think they would say climate change is the biggest
security and development challenge
because of the way in which it has a, sort
of poses an existential threat, uh, to them in some cases.
And, and I'm just reconciling that with
what we heard when we had the Ministry of Defense
and Defense Force here a couple of days ago, um,
and some of the other security challenges they're seeing,
how, how do you think they, they balance up,
They, The, the, some of the security challenges
and, uh, state actors in the Pacific
alongside issues like climate change?
Sure.
So I think when I answered your question, I was mindful of
how Pacific Island Country might answer the question if you
asked them what their biggest security challenges.
Yeah. They would say climate change.
There are a range of other challenges to the Pacific,
and I said in my opening statement
that geopolitical contest was one of 'em.
Uh, so one of those challenges is ensuring that
that strategic competition does not
have negative effects on the development
of Pacific Island countries, either as countries
or as members of the Pacific Islands Forum.
And that's something we work very hard to do
to ensure the security challenges
strategic competition is mediated as much as possible
through the concept of
what we call pf centrality committee might be familiar
with the concept of, as centrality a very important
principle to, uh, the Southeast Asian country who remember
of us young, it's becoming more
and more important to Pacific Island countries,
that the Pacific Forum is able to be the, um, as it were,
the small left forum
and the fulcrum through with other,
through which other countries engage in the Pacific.
And there are examples, for example, in the case of China,
where we are seeing engagement with the Pacific in ways
that is, uh, less attentive to that concept
of p centrality than many countries
in the Pacific would like.
So, and I would say that that would be seen, I think clearly
as, as, um, as an issue which is on
the strategic radar of the region. Yeah.
So if I come to the, the biggest one, which you talk about
as being climate change and can understand
that the existential nature of, of that.
Um, and, and we've had a few questions about the climate,
uh, finance that,
that you provide 1.3 billion in this three year period,
22 to 25.
Yep. And, uh, previous three years there was down as 19
to 22, so I was assuming it was a financial year,
and there's an overlap in there,
A calendar year.
So the last one, yeah, confus,
It's confusing. It's,
It's on a calendar bizarrely.
Just to confirm that though, the last one was
300,000,019 to 22.
So which year did 22 come in? Mm-Hmm.
So, uh, new commitment, uh, started in calendar year,
um, 22.
Now look after, think about this.
Um, and I think it was, it's probably
because it's how it was, um, how it was sourced.
So 500 million of
that 1.3 billion came from existing IDC expenditure
and 800 million was new,
which basically was 200 million additional per year
of that four year period. Okay.
Okay. So, so you, you talk in,
in the climate finance strategy about
an evidence-based approach.
Um, and I appreciate we we're not the whole way through,
but I just wonder if you have some, um, uh, examples
of something you can share in terms of how
that, how that is going?
The kind of activities that climate,
our climate finance has funded, you mean?
Yeah, and the, and the impact that that's having,
because it's a, it's a big chunk of money.
We wanna, we wanna make sure it's
actually changing big things.
'cause this is, as you say, the biggest issue. Yeah,
Yeah, exactly.
Thank you. Exactly. Um, yes, look, it, it's significant.
There's a whole range of different programs and activities,
but sort of the sorts
of things we've got might be things like, um, weather,
early warning systems and, uh, data, um, systems.
One of the big areas we've realized is there is,
there is not very good data available in the
Pacific and much of the Pacific.
So a big focus has been on actually improving the data
collection so
that decision makers have better data in which they can
actually base, uh, their decisions on.
There's a big, um, series of programs
around food and water security.
Uh, 'cause we, we talk a lot about the, the, um,
the sea level rise
and you sort of, in your mind think of sort
of sea washing across,
but it's also the, the lifting water table
and the increased sa salination of just swirls, uh,
which is actually leading to quite a few droughts
around the Pacific, which is sort of, you know,
semi counterintuitive, but that's another real problem.
So there's a lot of work underway about
how do we actually just capture water better?
How do we capture and store water, um, better
because of course, if you go down the desalination route,
very expensive technology, uh, as well, there's a lot
of work around, um, energy.
How do we shift to renewable, uh, energy, um,
different programs
around different parts of the Pacific, but
It, but it's tangibly delivering improvements that, that
speak to the value of the investment.
Yes, yes, it is.
So it is shifting away from, um, uh, from diesel generators,
for example, into renewable batteries.
But I mean, yeah, I'll be honest, it, it's quite hard
because of course they're maintaining the batteries
and ensuring that they keep storage.
You know, it, it's an ongoing thing.
And I think that's one of the real challenges
and a lot of this work is it's never kind of done
and then you are moving on, it's done
and then you keep doing it next year
or you keep maintaining it
or you keep sort of ensuring that it does work.
Because otherwise we've got some examples
where maybe a renewable, um,
battery program was put in renewable, um, solar panels,
the batteries stop working,
and at which point then the programs sort of null and void.
So it is the constant, uh, engagement
and a big part of that is
therefore working with our partners so
that they actually have the skills
and ability to keep these activities running.
You're not relying on big influxes of either people
or technology from offshore all the time.
So, so can I ask about that as an example of,
of the tensions that you're balancing?
Because I, I know that in your climate finance strategy,
I think Goal One talks about accelerating action to,
to lower their own national, um, national
determined contributions
through things like reducing fossil fuels
through changing agricultural practices.
And I understand that and they're good things,
but then the strategy, um,
also talks about the value proposition of prosperity.
And the government policy statement says,
talks about supporting, um, helping them to find their voice
and supporting their development.
And it must be attention to manage wanting,
you know, on the one hand you're saying, well,
we've gotta reduce emissions.
We wanna change value agriculture.
But on the other hand saying, well, actually we need you
to leverage every, every dollar you can.
Because one of the principles I thought was,
we don't actually expect developing countries
to lower their emissions as quickly
as more developed country.
I mean, how do you reconcile those two points
that almost feel like they're competing within the strategy?
Yeah, it's a, it's a really good observation and,
and I guess it kind of signs up a lot of the climate debate
around the world is actually sort of
how you do actually do the fundamental shifts
that are a community
or a society where a government is being, um,
is being asked to do.
So, while we do try to focus a lot on sort of increasing,
um, renewable, so basically reducing your emissions profile,
the Pacific will be the first ones to tell you
that they are a minuscule contributor to global emissions.
So that is probably not the biggest issue
for them by a long stretch.
Yeah, it's actually about
how do they actually survive when they are, they are,
in their words again, the front line
of the impacts of the climate change.
So the sort of the adaptation piece is a big part of our,
of our, um, kind of finance strategy
and the, um, investment, uh, that we are making.
And I think in the, uh, when we had the,
when we had the strategy signed off, we kind of had about,
we had minimum 50% spend in the Pacific minimum
of 50%, um, adaptation.
Well, currently we are looking at about 65% Pacific
and about 70% adaptation, probably reflecting the challenges
of actually how do you have sort
of climate resilience societies?
How do you focus it through to infrastructure?
How do you build things that are actually going to withstand
Yeah. Because if this is an
existential threat, then
that fundamentally, A, can we protect them and,
and B, can they have an economy to achieve some, you know,
quality of life and decent services
to look after people there?
Yeah. And, and then can we consider
how we help them over time reduce their very proportionately
small emissions?
Yeah, that, that's right.
And I think a big piece around say, um, uh,
say the diesel generators is also just the unreliability,
because a lot of the time you are,
you are shipping up your diesel to outer islands
that are many hours away and the ship may
or may not arrive on a particular day
and your generator runs out.
So actually having renewables is also really helpful
for them and actually their economic viability by,
through being able to therefore keep communications channels
running, you know, keep refrigeration going,
keep water reticulation.
So it's, um, it all kind of,
it's all linked one way or another.
And, and when it's 70%, 60, 70% on adaptation
and resilience, I know in, in New Zealand, you know,
you think about the Auckland floods
and now we're saying, well, look, there are areas
where we're just not gonna let you build
'cause the risk is too high.
How do you manage the difference between adaptation?
We're actually, maybe we need to live
or work in different areas
or in different ways, versus the resilience
of let's protect your ability to live
and work in the way that you always have.
I mean, how, how do we, how do you navigate that?
Uh, carefully. Um,
but actually I think it goes back
to a question from, um, Ms.
Blu as well. A big part is how we engage with
that partner country and with that people,
because there's a lot of often historical
or traditional knowledge that will,
they will tell you actually people haven't traditionally
lived on the coast because of X, Y, or Z.
So actually you might want see front views,
but actually that isn't where people actually lived.
They lived further in land, they lived further up the hills.
So there is sort of quite a lot of working
with those people on the ground about what they think
and what they have seen,
because also what the changes are are happening
that they are kind of having to adapt to every day
and using that knowledge rather than thinking that we kind
of know best by coming in from outside.
And we'll come to Tiana ano,
Um, kilda, um, uh, Kirra, um, uh, my,
my questions are on climate finance, um, as well as, so you,
you've answered some of those questions,
but if I could just follow on from that
because I, I think about this all in the context of
how Pacific Island countries, uh,
see this being on the front lines of climate change
and noting that ATU is actually at the ICJ, um,
at this moment pushing for that.
And I was wondering just in the context,
what we've been talking about, uh, about the outcomes
that have been achieved so far with the climate finance.
Uh, I think it's 862.69, um, million dollars.
Uh, and in your comments, I,
I was wondering if you could also talk about the feedback
loop, um, as well.
'cause just noting what Donw had said earlier,
this will need to be an ongoing conversation, uh, with, uh,
with Pacific Island communities about how we continue to,
to support and be good neighbors and good, good relatives.
Um, so one of you could talk a bit about that.
Mm, yeah. Great. Thank you.
Um, in terms of the outcomes, I mean, it is quite hard, uh,
and I really should have come
with some better examples prepared, but
because there are so many different, uh, things
and activities, but we are seeing, um,
there's some climate migration work that's underway,
particularly in Fiji
and where communities are relocating, uh, in response to,
um, the, basically their,
where they live is not inevitable anymore.
Uh, and as, as you will know very well,
that's a really complex issue
because of course, land tenure, land ownership is such a,
um, a big issue in the Pacific.
And so if people are moving well, where are they moving to?
Whose land are they moving to?
So that's a, an area where there has been quite a lot of,
um, of good work done in some particular, uh, countries.
I think there's some, some of the, as I said
before, the data and evidence piece I think have
been really important.
Like the sort of the early warning weather piece.
The actual, um, uh, an agreement we signed recently with,
um, uh, with spread when we were up at the Pacific Islands
Forum was around making sure that, uh,
there was sufficient boys
and other things out there to capture data,
but then actually relay the information into decision makers
so they can put out a tsunami warning so they can put out,
uh, um, any other sort of warning, uh, they want.
So it's a, there's a lot of really interesting things,
but of course a lot
of these activities take place over
a long period of time as well.
So we do have to keep testing, keep evaluating,
keep checking if they are actually delivering in the way
that we thought that they would.
In terms of the feedback
that we get from Pacific Partners in particular, um,
as bead said, climate is the biggest issue for them.
Uh, so they want us to keep doing, um, this work.
They want us to be doing this work, uh, in partnership.
And one of the quite different approaches that we've taken
with climate finance is, um,
what we are calling country flexible finance,
where we will reach an agreement with another country
to say, uh, where they will go, here's our national plan.
This is what we want to achieve out of climate finance or,
or, or our climate priorities.
Um, we go, okay, that all looks pretty good and makes sense
and we will then fund, uh, that country
and then they can have sort of priority
and ownership as to how that money is, um,
spent against its priorities rather than us coming in
and doing individual projects.
So it is to try to give more ownership
and going back to the whole point about
who actually knows best about what's happening in the
country, it is the sort of the leaders
and the people of that country.
So that's been quite an innovative space
that we've gone into this sort
of country flexible finance approach.
And that I think has been really welcomed
by our Pacific partners
because it has given them,
it puts them in the driver's seat, basically,
rather than puts us as donors in the driver's seat,
which is not where we need to be,
You know, interest in the committee on, um,
having a more granular sense of the climate finance,
um, progress and achievements.
But taking Bernadette's point that a lot
of the climate finances supporting projects
that are in midstream.
So there are, there are things that are as yet incomplete.
I think what we could probably look doing is providing the
committee with a note on progress to date
and the kind of projects, um,
it'll be highly particularized.
'cause there's a large sum of money
and there are lots of projects,
I think of one in particular.
I know there's one on, um, Pacific horticulture.
Um, and it's adaptability to climate change,
which has already, I think seen a very significant increase
in jobs in the target countries
and an increase in the export value of the room modified
agriculture horticulture profile.
But it's those kind of things we could provide, um,
should we could provide a note
to the committee, give you a breakdown.
As I say, um, many of them are forces in midstream.
Some like the one I've just mentioned are complete.
I think that would be good. And, and, and,
and in that, if you could have like a, um, kind
of like a timeline to completion as well, I think
that would be, that would be, that would be useful.
And probably the other thing I think would be interesting
for us as well, to sort of see, uh, you know,
we have all these projects and happening all over the place
after those projects are completed,
then what's done with that, with that data?
How does it further inform your work?
Um, and so, so kind of some, uh, uh, uh, uh,
something in there around what that, what that process is.
Uh, and I think about what you were saying earlier
around about climate migration, right?
I mean, it's a live conversation around if people for
who may have to leave their homelands, how,
how do they move from place to place?
And so would that work inform a conversation between you
and maybe immigration in terms of, um, flexibility around,
uh, visa conditions?
I think that would be, that would be,
that would be something interesting, um, to look at.
Mm, yep. Thank you. Yeah, we are happy to do that.
And as, as you'll all know from devouring Daniel report,
there's the whole IDC annex at the back of the report,
which has got quite a few different, um, case studies
and facts and figures.
But you're right, we can,
we can hone in particularly on some
climate ones if that's of use.
Uh, I'm just interested in how you assess effectiveness
or some of these more subjective measures,
not just in climate finance.
I spoke with the IDC program more broadly.
Um, uh, percentage of activities
with effectiveness rate is good or better, 70 down from 73,
but, you know, it's quite a subjective thing
and improve the livelihoods of 480,000 people.
Well, how do you measure
that you've improved in someone's livelihood?
Yeah, it's Some insight into that. It's
A, it's a great question.
We spend a lot of time into lead basing,
how you actually measure, uh, how you evaluate and measure.
And I guess there's a few things I'd say is, um,
we have our priorities framework.
So that's probably the key thing, is that we actually know
what it is we're trying to achieve, uh, collectively
and how we are supporting New Zealand's uh, interests.
And then sort of for each activity that we do,
we use the treasury better business case model.
So we have our, um, our five cases, our strategic case,
our economic case, our commercial case,
our financial case, and our management case.
And so that gives us our, our sort of breakdown
before we even go into an activity that we think it is going
to be able to, uh, meet the requirements and actually,
and actually deliver on what the strategic case will tell us
that we are trying to do.
And a big part of that is actually focusing on
what is the problem that we're actually trying to address?
What are we trying to achieve out of this?
Um, and is our approach fit for purpose?
'cause there's a lot you could do that actually it might
work in one country, even across the Pacific.
It might work in Papua New Guinea,
but it's not going to work in Val.
Uh, so it's, it's, there's a, a lot of individualization
that then needs, uh, to happen.
Then what we have is also our, our NEUR frameworks,
our monitoring evaluation research
and learning frameworks that we have for all our activities.
So we test our activities against those
to see are we actually meeting,
are we doing what we said we'd do?
Did it turn out in the way that we anticipated
or thought, um, that it would,
and we get a range of sort of the, um,
the quantitative data, as you said,
sort of the counseling of people.
But what we're also trying to do now is shift
to more impact data.
And some of that is more probably qualitative, um,
and more, uh, sort of oral data, which we are sort
of moving into and
'cause it is quite hard to measure something
that might be 5, 10, 50 year project.
But we also then have a range of, um,
of independent evaluations as well.
So we have ARA evaluations that sort
of done at the program level.
So we might do, I think we've recently done one on sort of,
uh, renewable energies, so all our renewable energy.
So we evaluate a whole thing
or we might, uh, do an activity based type one.
We might be looking at a specific activity just to go, is
that actually working as we said it would.
And we get independent evaluations done
of our projects as well.
There's quite a strong, um, a very strong sort
of constant circle of checking ourselves
and having other people check us.
Then we bring in, whether it be the OEC deck
or we have other partners.
'cause a big part, you know, sort of theme
of this discussion has been about the partners.
It's making sure that we check in
with our partners is is it working for them?
Is it actually delivering
what they thought it was going to deliver?
Um, or is it, is it not?
And like all these things, you can get a lot
of information but's then what you do about it.
So making sure we have the right governance in place
to be able to take all that information
and then pivot as we need to pivot or,
and stop doing things, which is probably the hardest
of all if something isn't working to actually stop it,
but not gonna pretend that's
Easy. Yeah. And look, this
is a massive contribution
that New Zealand makes is an
international development program.
It's important that we continue to do that,
but of course we have to have confidence
that investing taxpayer funds outside
of New Zealand is actually providing the best return
possible and delivering meaningful outcomes.
And I accept you can't always measure specifically
how you've improved someone's livelihood
or those sorts of, of measures,
but you can have confidence
that it has happened without having to put a figure on it.
Um, just on the, the percentages,
if we can just get a quick, um, update on
where you're at with that.
Uh, we saw 63% in the Pacific over the last year.
Um, where do you see, you talked about potentially 65 this
year, but you mentioned you're still working through those.
When do you expect to finalize those percentages
and, and um, Mr.
Corey, you've mentioned around a good focus into
a CA nations as well.
Do you have a percentage figure you're working to
that region on as well as the Pacific?
Yes, indeed. I mean, I think those percentages are
essentially set for the training, um, that Bernadette can,
can amplify on that as to how they break down.
Yeah, that's right.
So for our next training, so that started on, uh, one July
and through until 20, 20, 30 June, 2027.
And I'll come back to climate finance
because of the different years we use.
Um, but of that we've still maintained, uh,
60% for the Pacific.
Uh, global has gone up to 15%
and that's an, um, that's an increase up from 12.
And a big part of that increases around Southeast Asia.
Uh, is the particular focus there in order to be able
to fund, uh, some of that increase, we are reducing some
of our programs outside of south and Southeast Asia.
So a few in Africa and a few in Latin America.
So doing a few re
So sorry, you don't have a specific target
for south and Southeast Asia?
A global percentage? We do.
So within the global,
and I do, I have it in front of me,
we have a, that's the last one.
No, it's, I think it's, it's 15%.
And I can give you the breakdown is sort of where
that goes into the different parts of the global picture,
uh, geographies, humanitarian is, uh, 10%
of our program is humanitarian.
And a big part of where that goes is depending on
where the need is, depending on what's actually happening.
Responsive, exactly what we're responding to.
And then multilateral is also, uh,
10%, uh, of our budget.
And then we have kind of a,
we call it a strategic development fund,
and it's kind of our slightly unders and overs.
It's our way of responding to something big has happened.
There's a new government priority and we can use that fund.
Or we have a big activity that was going to be, say,
a 50 million active million dollar activity somewhere
that actually the phasing is like way out.
Well then we can bring
that money into our strategic initiatives fund
and then make sure it's then put
to the next highest priority.
So you sort of, because a lot
of these development programs are so long, you,
you need quite a lot of flexibility to respond
to actually what's happened on the ground
or if there's been a cyclone
and actually that country can't absorb
what we actually had agreed we would do.
So it's, it's quite a res Yeah, it, it's,
it's constant juggling basically.
Uh, last question on this section, Damien O'Connor, uh,
look, thank you very much and kind of shift across to one
of those areas, I guess the multilateral one United Nations
where we play a part with UNDP,
but also with Ara useless funding we did
as a country, uh, in January.
And you then undertook a review of that funding.
Can you explain the process of, of information
that was received to initiate that
stop on funding and then the review process?
Because the issue is, I guess, um, the credibility of,
of accusations and they, they float
around the world all the time.
So, you know, what, what was the process
of assessing those claims?
Mm-Hmm. That information
and then the review process you go through.
I'll, I'll leave it to Paula
to dive into the particularities,
but it's, I don't think it's correct
that we, we paused our funding.
That's right. Um, our funding, I think was timed
to be released around the middle of this year.
Mm-Hmm. Uh,
the allegations made about UN unwrap occurred
at an earlier point in time.
The intervening period gave us time to, um,
carefully consider the international
assessments that have been made.
So we are no further payments. That was the announcement.
Some significant reviews, um, undertaken
of those allegations, uh, one by Catherine,
the former foreign minister of France,
and I think a separate one undertaken
by the United Nations itself.
And both those reviews gave us, um, sufficient confidence
to be able to release our, our annual funding to RA
around the middle of this year.
But Paula, if that's right, if I put any of
that incorrectly, please, please,
No, that's all correct.
So the funding that was released in June,
that was the third year of a trium agreement with ra,
will have to put new advice to the minister at some stage
in early next year about the next trium of funding.
But for the moment, we've paid all of our
committed assistance to unre, as B says, it would be un
So the announcement that we, we heard of mm-Hmm.
In January that no further payments would go, then I guess
that that sparked a review.
And what did the review,
what was the process of that review?
As bead said, there were two threads of work.
One was the UN's own internal oversight committee,
which looked at the allegations.
And the second was the review
by the former French foreign minister, Catherine Kalana.
She made a whole range of recommendations, which has had
to work through, and UA is having to continue to work
through those in order
to ensure the neutrality of its staff.
Now it's got 30,000 staff, of course,
including 13,000 in Gaza alone.
So it's no small task to make sure that not one of 'em is
saying something,
which calls into question their neutrality.
But Unru is focusing on that very carefully as
They go forward. And so my
question was,
and I don't wanna be awkward here, Mm-Hmm.
It, it is around the one of, you know,
independent foreign policy.
You know, of course we are linked to the un,
but then the, the implication that we can conduct our own
or whether we rely on the advice of, of the UN
or some other organization.
So in this instance,
you relied on the review carried out by the un.
That's right. Yep.
All right. Thank you. We'll come now
to the international engagement and reputation section.
First question from Phil Traffic
Next chair. Um,
a few questions on orcus, uh, security issues.
Um, what are the six lines of inquiry
that officials are exploring
to assess the potential New Zealand
contribution under pillar
two? Could you talk us through those?
When you refer to lines of inquiry
Yeah. They're explicitly
been set out and cabinet papers
and so on, you know, reference, but not set.
So the areas of potential cooperation Yeah.
Or technologies. They're, they're referred to as the lines
of inquiry and such.
So I think the ORUS members have said publicly
that there are six lines of inquiry
to use to use that expression.
Yep. Which they're considering under pillar two, cyber
artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, hypersonic
and counter hypersonic capabilities, electronic warfare
and undersea capabilities.
Yeah. So officials are engaged in talking
to the orcus partners,
but also talking to our own companies
that have potential capability in those areas to figure out
where we have capability that might actually be able
to make a contribution to those lines of effort,
which orus partners have already identified as their focus
And we, we, we are engaging them
would benefit us. Mm-Hmm.
Okay. Yeah. And, um, what industry
and academic stakeholders have you
engaged with part of that process?
Defense is the one in particular.
Defense, military capability
and procurement are the ones
who are having those conversations.
I'm afraid I don't have that
information in front of me. Okay.
Are you able to supply it to the committee?
Uh, we can share as, can check with the defense ministry
that they are, as Paul says, leading that bloody work.
Okay. If I could ask the, if you, if you could do that
and report back to the committee, if that's right.
We, we can certainly ask the question of them. Okay.
Alright. Then may be a commercial confidence
considerations, but ask if they're able
to supply it. Can we get
It? Yeah. It's the defense
technology agencies that's doing most
of those conversations specifically.
Okay. Um, what assessments have been made
of New Zealand's ability to procure the kinds
of advanced military technology being talked about
in relation to pillar two?
Um, through, um, the existing five is science
and technology, uh, mechanism
or bilaterally, including from partners that are not members
of, is that something that you have looked into
and are advising the government on? Could
You run over the question again? 'cause
I think it had two, two parts to it.
Yeah. So asking what assessments, uh, have been made
of New Zealand's ability to procure the kinds
of advanced military technology being talked about, um,
in relation to pillar two through other mechanisms like, um,
five eyes science and technology or bilaterally?
The, the question Chris poses, I think
that the conversations
with the Orcus parties are more
advanced than they actually are.
Mm-Hmm. Because I don't think we've yet got to a point
where we can make a comparative judgment about whether
pursuing a particular line
of inquiry under ORCA would be a more efficient
or a less efficient, uh, way of, um, of
engaging on the technology in question bearing,
bearing in mind, of course, that this is a very dynamic
context, uh, there may be other countries which also seek
to join Pillar two, and until that picture is clearer,
it's very difficult to form
that kind of comparative judgment.
Yep. Um, given that pillar two is, um, uh, producing
or plans produce highly networked, um, systems,
what safeguards exist to prevent New Zealand information,
uh, being shared to nuclear command
and control infrastructure or autonomous weapons systems?
Again, it's a's a question that I don't think is capable
of being answered simply
because of the very early exploratory stages.
Um, uh,
but I can say that in any policy advice that went
to the government, uh, we would ensure
that our national interests
and values, uh, would be protected.
Uh, that would be an, an important consideration
in the policy advice.
But we are, we are nowhere near that point at this stage.
And obviously the export controls regime
that we were talking about earlier would still apply
to any strategic goods
Indeed. Right?
I mean, it is, these things are hypothetical
because it is a hypothetical discussion,
but that all the technologies
that are being talked about are designed
to be highly networked.
And if we were participating in those systems,
it does raise the hypothetical scenario that information
or data that we might generate or have
or provide, um, would be, uh, the risk
that they would be used in things that, uh,
New Zealand has law
and policy, uh, that should prevent it.
That is autonomous, lethal, autonomous weapons systems
and nuclear command control structures.
So given it's a hypothetical, are you, are you saying
that your advice would prevent, that would preclude that
New Zealand already participates in highly
networked engagements?
Yeah. With its Ally Australia
and with its close defense partners
and in so doing any such risks that, uh, uh, seem
to arise are managed in accordance
with New Zealand law and policy.
And that would be the approach we would take, um,
under any engagement, uh, under ORUS pillar two.
But again, we are a long way from getting to that point.
Okay. Um,
and so finally on, on orus, what, um,
what assessments have you made about, uh, the implications
of potential involvement in pillar two
with New Zealand's relationships in the Pacific?
Especially with respect to, um, the kinds of priorities
that we were just talking about
before in relation to climate change, um, support
for nuclear disarmament
and against militarization, all of things which are all
keenly felt in the region.
Again, because the,
OR discussions orus pillar two discussions are at such
a nascent stage.
It is not yet possible to arrive at a fixed proposition, uh,
which could then be measured in light of its, uh,
regional consequences and reverberations.
They would, of course, as I said in session with Mr.
McClay earlier this morning, be something
that was very seriously taken into account in any, in any,
uh, foreign and defense policy engagement.
Uh, it is always more than simply the channel
that you're operating on, it's the context in which
the construct would exist.
And we, we have, um, you know, a very close relationships
with Pacific Island countries as we do with the countries
of the wider region, and they would
inform the policy advice.
So, um, in light of Kurt Campbell's comments about ORUS
and, um, the, the possibility
or likelihood that the, um, these, uh,
potential nuclear powered submarines
that Australia might get could be used in a
conflict around Taiwan.
Um, does the ministry regard the people's Republic of China
as a military threat to New Zealand?
I'm not, I don't quite understand
how the connection is drawn between
what Kurt Campbell has said about orus pillar one,
which is a construct
with which New Zealand will not be engaging
for all sorts of obvious reasons Yeah.
Relates to the second, because
They're both called Orca.
And I would argue that's, it's entirely artificial to say
that one pillar is completely separate from the other.
They're both part of the same security pact.
And, um, and, uh, Orca is designed
to contain China's growing influence, numerous
commentators within ORUS partners
and outside who say that, um,
and you are developing advice
for the current government on whether
or not, uh, they might want to join
orus pillar two if they were asked.
So I'm asking, do you consider China
to be a military thread? I
Wanna go back to some of the premises of your question.
Um, and when you say orus as a security pact, um,
orus pillar two, which is the only thing in frame
for New Zealand is, um, as far
as we understand it, uh, a technology arrangement.
And when you talk about joining it
or joining a pact, uh, as Dr.
Barrington explained, um, in a, in the committee,
this hearing, uh, in a hearing this committee had the other
day, uh, as we understand it,
what would be entailed is agreement
to cooperate on a given technology domain, uh,
not signing up to some kind of new alliance were packed.
So I just wanna make sure
that is put on the record of this committee again.
That is, that is how we understand it.
Um, uh, if we joined Orella two, uh,
it would be to ensure
that New Zealand's defense capabilities, uh,
were enhanced in ways that met our interests.
That would be its purpose, um,
how others have constructed its purpose in respect
of other countries, including China is not really
for me to comment on
Even the, or partners themselves.
That's, that's a matter for them. Okay. We'll
Have a supplementary from Laura McClure from Tiana to
Something. And on that,
would it be naive of New Zealand to not accept
that there is a global power struggle
and we need to assess all our options when looking at our
security for the future?
Uh, it's very important that New Zealand is capable
of protecting its interests and supporting those interests
and our values internationally.
And that is done through diplomacy, uh,
through intelligence,
through defense capability, and through development.
Those are, those are things which help protect New Zealand.
And we will always put those interests,
those New Zealand interests first,
and all of those vectors of our influence.
Um, uh,
and as I said in my opening statement, the world is a,
is a less safe, less secure and more volatile place.
So it is indeed very important that we are capable
of protecting ourselves
and standing up for our ally and our friends.
Mm-Hmm. Tiano ano.
Yeah. Um, thank you. Thank you for your answer so far.
And my, my questions. Um, uh,
'cause I hear what you're saying that you haven't gone too
far down the tracks in, in terms of, uh, being able
to answer some of our questions around pillar two.
But I was wondering if there's any work being done on the
issues around interoperability.
Uh, when we did have Mr.
Barrington here, he did, he did talk about
how we have sovereignty.
One of them talked about how you have somary boxes where,
um, where systems can actually be contained in itself.
'cause there is a concern, uh, that if we start
to be completely inter, inter interoperable,
which can happen, how do you prevent
interoperability from happening?
Um, so is there any, are you,
are you looking at any advice around that?
Uh, particularly if, uh, the orcas partners start
to drift off and they are, in my view, drifting off into,
into areas which, uh, we should be uncomfortable with.
Well, and the issue of interoperability, um, is,
is more a matter I think, for the defense agencies.
Um, I would simply say that if you are a small country, uh,
with a vast maritime environment in a troubled world,
an increasingly troubled world,
it's clearly highly desirable to be interoperable
with your only ally
and indeed with other partners
who share your values and interests. Um,
Just to be a bit more specific, it's, it's not a case
of you can be interoperable.
You can be interoperable, but then also
because of diplomatic situations changing that you are able
to shut off that interoperability.
Um, so looking at like, uh, getting advice, uh, ar
around that, that piece.
Yeah, I mean, I, I guess, um,
interoperability doesn't combine confine sovereign choice.
So being closely interoperable with Australia does not mean,
for example, that on every single foreign policy
or security policy question that New Zealand is, is, is, um,
is somehow kind of ensnared into engaging with Australia.
Uh, very, very often we will be wanting
to cooperate closely, but interoperability isn't something
which leads to, to inevitably to being somehow shackled, uh,
on everything sovereign choice remain
Open. And just,
and, and,
and a question around the conversations that you,
you are having, uh, with other nations.
Uh, are you having them with countries
that are not orcas partners, uh, countries that are
around about same size as us, say, like, say for example,
the Nordic countries, uh, in terms of how they are managing,
um, similar issues, uh, and and,
and will that be, uh, be part of, uh, your analysis In terms
of advice back to around Aus?
I'm not aware of any Nordic interest in Aus, uh,
or of any discussions
that we are having with those countries.
It is possible that there are other countries in the
Indo-Pacific, um, who are, uh, looking to engage
with Pillar two of orus for, for reasons.
Um, we can probably all understand, um, any discussions
that New Zealand's having is, is primarily, uh, with,
of course, the parties, um, pillar two
or the countries engaged in pillar two
And and engagement in the Pacific as, I'm sorry, you,
you had an answer there.
I was just gonna say that it's entirely separate to Orcus,
but we do have conversations with some
of the Nordic countries that are NATO
partners in the context of our cooperation with nato.
And that includes at the working level,
I understand potentially around interoperability
to make sure that we can operate beside each other.
Yeah, I I was thinking generally about Nordic countries
and I was gonna say south, um,
South Korea, but then, all right.
Yep. We'll come to Tim Costley supplementary. Sorry,
I just wanted to pick up, cover the questions earlier
and cut through any remaining tinfoil on hats.
Just to be really clear, have you been, um, asked to
or conducted any work
that would change New Zealand's nuclear free policy
or contrave, any domestic international law in that regard?
No. Thank you.
Next question. Thought thanks. Oh, sorry.
Damian O'Connor had a supplementary apologies.
Oh, you go. Yep.
Um, just wanted to switch to Palestine, uh,
and I'm sure you will have read the, um,
ICJs advisory opinion, which, um, spells out very clearly
the, um, court's view
that countries like New Zealand have a obligation under
international law not to aid
or assist, um, what it describes as the illegal occupation,
and particularly the illegal settlements in
the occupied territories.
Um, and I, I wonder what thinking you've done
or advice you've developed about, um,
what that means for New Zealand.
What does it mean for New Zealand, uh, not to aid
or assist the illegal occupation,
Victoria? So
Victoria Hallam, who's our deputy secretary
for multilateral and legal matters. Hi.
Yeah, We have indeed, um, looked, uh,
closely at the advisory opinion.
And, uh, we consider that there is, uh, nothing
that New Zealand is currently doing
that would put us in contravention of international law, um,
including international law as articulated in that opinion.
Okay. Do you think that, um, new Zealand's wealth funds
to the NZ Super fund
and a CC investing in companies like Motorola
that are listed on the UN database of corporations, uh,
are deemed by the UN to be complicit in the building
and maintenance of the illegal settlements, do you think
that amounts to aiding and assisting?
Uh, and secondly, do you think it's a risk
to New Zealand's international standing?
I think our sovereign wealth funds have well established
practices to assess the investments
that they are undertaking, uh,
and they seek, um, input on foreign policy issues.
Um, on regarding that, uh,
I guess I'm, I'm asking from a foreign, I know that,
I mean, a CC were here day before yesterday
and said they are reviewing their investments in light
of the a CJ opinion,
but I'm asking from a foreign policy perspective
what the ministry thinks.
I think it's important, uh, that, um,
these things are kept under regular review.
Um, it's an evolving situation,
and I think, uh, um, there are a lot of, uh,
a lot, a lot of moving parts.
And indeed, um,
there will be change decisions at various
points along the way. Yeah.
Have any corporations sought advice from
yourselves or investment funds?
We wouldn't be able to talk
to the committee about legal advice. Um,
I I not the, I'm not asking
for the particular legal advice I'm asking Mm-Hmm.
Have any come to you for advice?
Not that I'm aware of. Um,
why did, um, the ministry advise
and support New Zealand intervening as a third party in
Ukraine's case at the International Court
of Justice against Russia, um,
under the Genocide Convention,
but, um, has declined
to intervene in South Africa's genocide case at the
ICJ against Israel?
Um, there is, as yet no decision about whether
or not New Zealand would ultimately intervene in
the, the latter case.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, that is something that remains,
uh, under review.
The case is likely to take a number of years.
Uh, we intervened in the Russia, Ukraine case, uh,
because in the particular fact situation there, uh,
we felt there was, um, something valuable
that New Zealand could offer having a history
of success successfully intervening Mm-Hmm.
In the whaling case. Yep.
Um, and, uh, for that reason we joined, uh,
the fact situations
of the two cases are very, are very different. Mm-Hmm.
Okay. The, um, legislative statement
for the Russia sanctions Bill, um, mentions
that the bill was a, a, um, uh, response to actions taken
by Russia, which has threatened the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
I wondered if, um, the ministry has, has
considered a similar response, um, given, uh,
the ICJs advisory opinion, um, in relation
to Israel's legal occupation of the Palestinian Territories
and the recent, um, issuing of arrest warrants by the ICC
for Benjamin Netanyahu and others, including Hamas leaders,
New Zealand's long criticized Israel for its occupation
of Palestinian Territories.
Yes. Um, that remains a tenant of our policy
for the region. Sure. I'm
Asking, the specific question is I'm asking about the
sanctions response and whether or not there's consistency.
Well, that's a very different situation, isn't it?
'cause we are not talking about a sovereign territory
and breaking of the UN charter.
It's a very complex situation, obviously in the Middle East,
The ICJ all
but described the, uh, Israel's longstanding occupation
as a legal, um, orbit described it as apartheid.
Uh, is that not, does that not place it on a,
we put it on the scales, doesn't it make it, uh, similar
Sanctions are most effective when there's an international
movement where a number of countries take sanctions.
As was the case with Russia,
there is a vanishingly small number of countries,
not even the Arab countries
that are sanctioning Israel in the same way.
It would not be effective. Okay.
The, if I could ask one more, the, um,
the Foreign Minister has said that, um, it will be a matter
of when not if, uh, for New Zealand
to recognize Palestine Mm-Hmm.
As a state. Um, what's your advice about the,
the factors that should be considered in terms
of the timing of that decision?
It's a complex situation, isn't it?
We've always supported the two state solution,
and we continue to do so.
Some partners moved earlier on,
but that's made no tangible difference
to the situation in the Middle East.
What the minister has said is
that we will take a decision when it seems,
when it seems likely
to have the greatest impact
on the situation in the Middle East.
And for the moment, the immediate needs, there
are a ceasefire
and the unconditional release to the hostages
and a greater flow of humanitarian goods in de Gaza.
Those are the three priorities at the moment.
And they were also called out in the ICJ
provisional rule, right.
The request that more humanitarian goods go in.
So that's where our focus is for the moment.
Uh, we were slightly heartened by the fact
that they reached a ceasefire in Lebanon.
It's a very different set of circumstances,
but we hoped that that might be the first positive step
towards some positive steps in the region in order
for differences to be made there.
We fundamentally need the two parties to come
to the negotiating table and talk to each other.
And we're not seeing signs at that at the moment. But,
But would it not as, um, the governments of Ireland
and Spain and Norway
and others have said in recent months that
actually recognition in a growing number
of countries in 146 countries now Mm-Hmm.
Recognizing Palestine sends a political signal that, um,
that countries, including countries
of the West aren't prepared to stand by
and give Israel cover to continue doing what it's doing,
and that in fact, a political solution is needed.
That's the signal they said they wanted to send.
Isn't that, wouldn't that be a good thing
for New Zealand to be saying too?
We are sending that signal through multiple vectors.
Um, if you ask those countries now, uh,
what has been the consequence of their recognition
and whether it has shifted the dial at all on situation,
on the ground, taking into account the factors
that Paula has mentioned, they would probably acknowledge
that fact they have, um, as it were fired, the bullet.
But, um, uh, it has not appeared
to have had a material impact at all on the thinking
of, um, of the parties
Look, going back, given our, our crowd position
of having independent foreign policy
and growing weight of evidence.
Have you been scared of making a stronger position on the
basis of you've being accused of antisemitism?
In fact, uh, yourself, Mr.
Cory had to stand up
and support your staff against those claims?
Uh, if the question, um, is have we been scared off, um,
uh, by claims of antisemitism?
And the answer is no.
Right. We, We continue to contribute to conversations
and the Global Alliance, which has 90 countries all arguing
towards the two state solution.
So we are making our votes here.
Uh, I had a question in relation
to the ongoing activity further south from us,
and there's not much space further south from us.
So I think, you know, where I'm talking about.
Um, obviously we've seen an increased level of activity,
a strong desire to grow scientific presence on the ice.
Mm-Hmm. Number
of parties now having a high level of interest.
Uh, we've seen some activities in relation
to the Antarctic treaty program, uh,
some consensus decisions being held up now.
And I'm interested in some insights
or an update, uh, from you on any concerns you may have
around trends that might be developing down
there off the back of that.
Um, thank you. And, uh,
I know you've recently had the opportunity to see some
of the, um, great science
that is being done down in Antarctica, up close.
Um, yes.
The most recent meeting under the Antarctic Treaty system
framework, uh, was the Kamala meeting,
the convention on the conservation
of Antarctic marine living resources.
Uh, and that was, uh, a pretty tough meeting
and quite disappointing in some respects.
And, uh, the, we've already alluded to the, uh,
difficult, um,
geostrategic environment we're working in
the political tensions.
Um, and those, uh, tensions do make multilateral engagement
and, uh, multilateral treaties pretty challenging.
We were, uh, disappointed once again, not to be able
to make any progress on, uh, further marine protected areas,
uh, under the Kamala, uh, system. Um, and sorry, who
Stopped that pro progress.
Uh, a number of countries I think have not
been keen to do that.
But what was, uh, new
and particularly disappointing this time is
that we were not able to introduce measures
to protect the CRI krill fishing.
Um, and we have indeed expressed our disappointment, uh,
to China, that they were not yet ready
to support those measures.
And we hope that in future Kamala meetings, uh,
they will be able to do that.
Okay. Um, you know, I understand, uh, trying
to open their fifth base in Antarctica
earlier this year as well.
Um, on all for more scientific research,
understanding our planet and the challenges is important.
Um, part of the treaty system is open access, free access.
Do we have any plans to be part of
or to have an inspection process in line with
or visit that new base
and see some of the technological advances
that might've been developed given our
own redevelopment plans? In Scott Base?
Uh, one of the things we are doing, um, to try
and reinforce and strengthen the Antarctic treaty system is
we are having a lot of conversations
with our close partners, um, on how
to work together in the system,
and leaning into some of the transparency
and inspection, uh, mechanisms, uh,
is definitely on the agenda of those conversations.
Uh, we don't have anything, uh, concrete at the moment,
but, uh, we do think it's likely that, uh, uh, a number
of parties will be using those mechanisms, uh, frequently,
uh, to make sure that the system is holding up
and that the, um,
all parties are engaging in the Antarctic treaty system
consistent with the overriding principles around, uh,
a continent devoted to peace and science.
And do you still have a high degree of confidence
that system is robust and, and
It's still the best we've got?
Um, that's right. Actually, can I, can I,
sorry, can I just supplement
You? I, I,
that doesn't quite answer the
Question. Do you have
Any evidence that that might be shifting?
You might say it's the best we have,
but do you have any evidence, has there been any information
to indicate that any
of the new bases might be shifting away from that?
We are not seeing anything that suggests that, uh, um,
activities in Antarctica are not, um, consistent
with the principles of the Antarctic treaty system.
But if they were inconsistent,
there's no mechanisms under the treaty system to do anything
about that inconsistency.
Well, the, um, ability to conduct joint inspections of,
um, other countries, uh,
scientific bases is designed exactly to, um,
to ensure that, um, everyone's playing by the rules,
But even if they're not, what action
Can be taken?
Uh, I think it, we've talked about the advantage of, um,
sort of sunlight and, uh, collective, uh, discussions
and how that can encourage, um, good behavior.
I think it was Van Galles that raised that.
I, I think it would be the same in this situation. Stanley,
Sorry, can I just stop really quickly?
Yes. Um, how many inspections on any kind
of basis have occurred?
Like has New Zealand been involved in any other
inspections on any sites?
We haven't been involved in any recent inspections.
I don't have that information, uh, with me. Mm-Hmm.
Uh, other parties I believe have, um,
been conducting inspections.
Okay. Susan, Uh, Tiano, ano?
Sure. Um, actually I had a, I had a sub that was a,
a while back, but I've also got a, a prob as well.
I, uh, some, my, my, my sub familiar was whether you,
whether you have been giving any advice to the ministry of,
of, of space given, uh, some of the, um,
previously we've had launches from New Zealand,
from different branches of the US military who have got, uh,
particular connections with Israel, so like Black Sky,
the US Andile Space and Defense Command,
and US Special Operations.
So that was just the, uh, that, that's just the sub there.
But I, I did have a primary, so I dunno if you want to
do this up now, and I asked the primary after that.
Well, on the, on the, um, on that question, um,
it is the space agency, which administers, um, the process
of overseeing space launch from New Zealand.
They undertake that based on some clear agreed criteria
that, um, been in existence for a number of years.
There might be particular instances where they, um, check
with, uh, the ministry, uh,
but it's primarily a responsibility that sits with them.
Okay. So you guys don't give them any foreign
policy advice? Okay. Uh, if
They seek foreign policy advice, um, they would,
uh, we would, we would obviously
Provide, I've gotta ask that.
Uh, my, my, my primary is around.
Um, and, and just wanting to acknowledge the work that, uh,
that you did, uh, in, uh, in freeing, uh, Philippines.
I think that was really important work.
Um, and, and in West Papua,
and I know there was a lot of effort taken,
uh, right across as well.
So just wanting to, to acknowledge that.
But, uh, following on from that,
I was wondering if there is any work that's being done, uh,
in terms of, uh, the continuing situation in, in,
in West Papua, knowing that that is still a hot spot
of tension, uh, for, for the indigenous peoples of, of,
of West Papua, uh, in terms of what's hap happening there,
their struggles, um, the amount
of deaths that are happening there as well.
Uh, what's, what's the approach been, um,
following on from that?
And maybe you guys are just catching
your, catching your breath.
Uh, and I was wondering if you could
talk a little bit about that.
Uh, in terms of the Melanesian spearhead group
and then also the PF as well,
There's been, um, no particular body of work on the issue
of West Parkour that has ensued from, um, Mr.
Merton's very welcome release.
Um, uh,
and there has also, of course been a, um, you know,
a very significant change of government in recent months,
uh, in Indonesia.
Um, it is an issue on which the Melanesian spear spearhead
group remains active and interested.
Um, although I think there's a, a spectrum of views even
inside the group, uh, it's an issue which is
sporadically, I would say discussed, um, in pif contexts,
but not one that is, is prominent on the agenda.
Um, Bernadette may have more to add on that.
No, I think that's, um, uh, exactly right.
Uh, I think, um, Fiji has been sharing the Melanie Spearhead
group, uh, piece of work on this,
but it is very, um, uh, it is really within the forum.
It's quite contained to that group actually.
And they have been, they've been engaging
and they've been keeping other forum members involved in
their, um, not involved informed,
and it, it, it's kind of left it that, to be honest.
Okay. Is there, is there any, um, are you getting any,
any indications from them where they might be looking
to New Zealand for support or, um,
No, they haven't come to us, um,
for anything in that regard.
And I think it's been very much a sort of a melanesian, uh,
led, um, series of engagements and,
and also some strong series of engagements
with the Indonesian government as well.
Okay. And, and just 'cause I know the ministers in kaki
at, at the moment, uh, will there be an opportunity
for the, uh, for officials to update us on, on,
um, developments there, uh, following the return
of the minister from, from Kaki?
I mean, that would I, I would find
that interesting. It's just,
I mean, I think we're in the,
we're in the committee's hands.
If that's a topic you'd like a briefing on, I'm sure, um,
uh, once the team is back, um, it's,
that's certainly something we'd be obviously open to.
I I would hopefully others might join me, but thank you.
Excellent. Um, I know one of your strategic goals
around a peaceful, prosperous,
and resilient Pacific region, do you think we are more
or less so mm-hmm, on those measures than we were last year?
More peaceful, prosperous, and resilient than last year?
Uh, the, the trend lines are not positive.
Um, I mentioned some
of the challenges of my own next statement.
Uh, prosperity is a challenge.
Countries with very narrow economic basis still dealing
with the legacy of covid, uh, dealing with the risks
of climate change, um, uh, dealing with a range
of social risks, um, uh,
uh, communicable diseases.
Um, uh, other challenges arising from strategic competition.
Um, uh,
Intercontinental ballistic miss artists,
Uh, the, the, the, you know,
security shadow hanging over the Pacific
as evidence decided ships by that, by that,
um, by that missile.
Um, uh, the presence of guided missile destroyers, uh,
from China and atu, which I think was alluded
to at the defense hearing the other day.
So the tread lines are not,
are not enormously encouraging in the Pacific.
And it's why, as I said in my statement, we are,
we are redoubling our efforts, and not just unilaterally,
but redoubling our efforts to engage others in the Pacific.
Mr. Peters has recently returned, uh,
and gone away again, uh, returned from Europe, um, uh,
where he spent his time in Berlin and Paris
and London, uh, underscoring the need for those partners
to continue leaning in as indeed they,
they have been in recent years.
Um, so obviously Australia is an enormous part of that.
Uh, European countries, the EU as a whole, um, public
of career, Japan, United States, Canada,
all very important, all very important.
They in with us to,
to help address those trend lines in the Pacific.
Okay. Supplementary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, as part of that doubling
of the effort in the Pacific, does that include discussions
around economic, economic support for the Pacific,
um, by way of relief of burden, debt burden on those
Countries? Yeah, I mean,
absolutely.
We, um, uh, the economic piece of this is very significant.
Um, although I don't know that the challenge
of indebtedness applies, um, in relation to those countries
that the minister is talking to.
Uh, there is a challenge of indebtedness,
including, I think, to China.
Yeah. Um, that is a challenge for the Pacific.
Um, anything to add on that?
Yes. And we do talk constantly
with our partners all across the Pacific about basically
what their biggest pressures are, what their challenges are,
and how we can, uh, support them, meet them,
and how do we engage with other partners.
And I think there's a really big role for the, um,
for the development banks, the A DV, the World Bank.
They're really critical partners actually, for
what they can offer through concessional loans
and other things that, um, uh, it's kind
of good debt and bad debt.
We would argue that you'd wanna be going to some of those,
um, some of those partners
to help you with your debt burden.
Yeah. So, yeah, constant conversations on that. Thank
You. All
right, members, we'll come now
to the internal management practices section.
You're on your own. Can I, can I, yes.
Are you giving enough for qua tradies?
I'm sorry. Well, You know, the trade sector, you know,
asking, being asked
To double exports.
They work very hard.
Is there enough, uh, resource within the, in fact,
going into the trade area?
Uh, well, I'm sure if Mr.
Batal were at the table, which, um, mercifully
for us all, of course he's not now.
Um, um,
but I mean, I think, you know, we could always do more
and we could always do it more resources,
but at the moment, I think hitting our objectives with the
Resources that we have. So, so
they're being expected to fly cattle class
and then hop off a plane and start trade negotiations.
Is that a bit unfair?
Uh, I think what you are alluding to as a policy,
which is not solely targeted at our trade colleagues, um,
although I think it has been rendered in the media as though
that were the case, um, it is a reflection
of the very tight fiscal times
and it is not always the case, um, that manga
and his colleagues or indeed myself will be, um,
will be flying economy for very vulnerable.
Perhaps the old travel standard would still apply. Mm.
Okay. Right. Any other questions under this section?
Well, yeah, sure, sure. I mean, thank you.
And I mean, I I think relative to other government agencies,
you've been, um, uh,
given the preferential treatment, we might say
for whatever reasons, but, um, Ms.
Cuts hadn't been the same.
I guess the question of whether
given the geopolitical challenges that we've talked about,
um, given the trade ambitions, um, where are we
cutting corners in, in our ambitious target as a country?
What we've done in the past, um, uh, eight
or nine months has been not so much to cut corners to make,
but to make sure that our big priorities are being fit.
So you have extensively, um, from Bunga this morning, uh,
about the extent to which we are leaning in on trade
'cause of its vital importance.
Uh, the way in which we are leaning in on
and doubling down on relationships in Southeast Asia.
Um, there are no government priorities on
which corners are being cut.
There are ways in which we are working quite hard to ensure
that the ministry can do things more efficiently
and we are, uh,
undertaking a very significant reprioritization
or a rebalancing of resources, uh, so that those priorities,
um, in particular and in Asia, in the Pacific
and in trade policy can be met.
And we are rebalancing report, uh, resources from some parts
of our system to enable us to do that.
We are also looking, um, significantly, uh,
at our corporate systems
to see whether we can find efficiencies and savings there.
Those are the sorts of things we are doing,
but we don't want to cut corners on the stuff
that really matters to, uh, to New Zealand.
One of those challenges has been your, it you note.
Any further update on that
and how an update can be really good
And then Sure. The lessons
Learned for Yeah.
Trying to avoid these things in the
future for more efficiencies.
Yeah, that's a, a very apt question.
So, uh, earlier in the year, uh, uh, an IQA was sought on
what we call our, uh,
digital Workplace transformation program
that identified some very significant shortcomings,
which have been well aired in the public domain.
Um, and they went to, um, you know,
some quite significant issues including about
how we govern big and complex multi-year projects.
Um, uh, it findings, you know,
uh, identified some really significant shortcomings
in our management of that particular project.
Um, those shortcomings have been rectified.
Uh, the project has been reviewed again. Mm-Hmm.
And the second IQA
and found to be hitting all its marks,
there are some wider lessons, uh,
that we can derive from it.
Um, including the need
to more closely interrogate complex projects in the IT area
and to ensure that our governance is fit for purpose so
that senior leaders and monitors
of these projects are asking the right questions and,
and ensuring that these kind of problems don't happen again.
And, and just to say we're making good progress
with the reset, just to deliver it on time
and within a reset budget
and the quality that we'd expect as well. Excellent.
Thank you. Can I just in terms of the, um, uh,
capital appropriation, I see if you save $10 million there,
um, I have seen some assets that are less than,
um, adequate around the world.
Uh, can we be sure that you're not simply running more
of those assets down to save that money from that, um,
capital appropriation?
Well, I mean, we keep our, we have a, you know,
a very significant capital footprint offshore with 58 posts,
um, where in and the number of them we, we own
and don't lease properties.
Um, and we every year try
and prioritize, you know, where our,
our scarce capital will go.
Um, we have a big project underway at the moment,
for example, in respect of Pacific,
where our own infrastructure is, um, a couple
of generations old dating back to the fifties
and sixties, that we are in a state
of cons constantly reviewing where the needs are greatest.
Um, uh, we are existing in very tight fiscal times.
Um, wherever we are, we do our very best to ensure
that even if it's not possible to remediate in a given year
that the property is still functional, that the health
and safety aspects can still be, um, uh,
can still be duly in place and so forth.
Uh, it kind of answers the question,
but really, I mean, uh, has been known that,
that a previous national government had a sweaty assets
program on the roads.
Are you being asked to sweat the assets
and will we end up with dilapidated assets around the world
as the, the, the, the, um,
I guess the shop front for our country?
The, the government is asking of us
what all governments have asked of us, which is
to manage our capital prudently, uh,
to prioritize and to plan well.
Um, and you know,
and no government wants to have assets offshore, which
don't show New Zealand in a good light, um, uh,
or which are unsafe for staff to, to live and work in.
And I don't think either of those
situations apply at present.
You don't. So of those assets, 588 million
of property assets revalued in the last year, do you know
what the split of that would be?
But how much of that would be in Europe, for example?
The, the what you, you're asking about
what value properties we have in Europe?
The value of the portfolio? Yeah.
Um, it, it's a bit more complex
'cause there's assets that we, uh, lease or rent, uh,
and there's assets that we actually own.
So primarily in Europe we are in the,
the lease, in the rent.
Um, so, but whereas, you know, in the US Asia
and certainly in the Pacific, uh, we are more
of the ownership, um, model
and where we do own, um, sense of coming back to um, uh,
sort of Connor's point.
Um, we have a full maintenance program
schedule, those sorts of things.
So that, you know, the, the kept up, uh, well
that didn't work for New Zealand house.
That's a a, a major project currently.
And, uh, one that, um, the required to sell off
of the building, I'm sorry, I don't wanna be pedantic,
but I, I think it is fear that we ask,
it's our responsibility to ask that you're not running down.
We've seen numbers of governments, I'm not gonna say who
and what when, but they have sold off
or run down our assets offshore to the point we,
we are not representing ourselves in some places
as well as we shouldn't.
We just on, on, on New Zealand house, um, uh,
we reached a stage, uh, where
we actually owned the building, uh,
but we didn't own the ground, uh, it stood on,
which is owned by the Crown Estate.
Uh, we came to a point where we had, uh,
just 25 years left on that actual lease.
Uh, so a decision had to be made on whether we stayed there,
which meant a renegotiation with the crown,
or else we found another home, uh,
for New Zealand's interests, uh, in the uk.
Um, as it was, we were able to enter a very, uh,
good agreement, uh, with the crown of state
that they took back the building.
They would develop, uh, the redevelop the building.
We would retain the bits that we wanted
and put that over 150 year period.
So in fact, use that term win-win for both parties.
And so that project is currently underway.
I think probably due, we would get
Back into that building in about, uh, 2028.
Does owning a property instead
of leasing it significantly improve our ability
to perform our functions internationally?
It depends. Where you are also depends very
significantly on cost.
So the judgment is gonna be always the judgment about
what is the best mode of representing New Zealand, uh,
but also cost, um, imagine the cost of owning, buying
and owning in European capitals in particular, um, is very,
very significant, um, in, uh, cases like the Pacific.
And it's less likely as a starting point
that there is significant infrastructure which you can
lease, and so you are more likely to have to build.
Yeah. Yes. So it's always a mix
of the, the different considerations.
Yeah, sure. But in terms of a building, whether you own it
or lease, it doesn't really have any impact on your ability
to perform your function from that building?
Uh, logically, no. And,
and from a security perspective, no problem.
Uh, we have
and have to maintain very high security standards
and those are applied whether we are an owner
or a tenant. Mm-Hmm.
And, and, and just on the suggestion
that buildings are being left to run down, is that a,
I guess a sign that over the last six years they weren't
being, you weren't adequately resource to look after
Six, Not six,
You know, the, the, the state
of our capital projects is at any one time it's gonna be a
function of the available capital to, um, to improve them.
And there is always more that can be done to lift them.
Um, and we do that wherever we can. All I expect
You say thank you, I wouldn't disappoint.
Right. Fair shot. Excellent. We'll move
Now to the NFA role on New Zealand security systems.
If we have specific questions under that from members
One. Yeah. From the thanking
Mr.
Chair, um, our, I,
uh, is there an intention with respect to, uh,
bringing together both the conversations
that we've just had on capital investments as well as
security to, is there a view to have more
operating skiffs in any of our facilities
around the world at the moment?
I know there is, at least in my my view, uh,
a shortage of people.
And given we've talked about an increase in security
challenges around the world, is there an intention to have
and build more skis available on
our network around the world
For residents? You understand
I answer this? Yeah.
I was trying at a, at a fairly high level,
but that's a matter we, we look at constantly.
You don't have to manage. And it's a challenging one
because it's not simply, um,
the important question you raise about
spreading the footprint.
It's ensuring that the current footprint remains fit
for purpose, um, against what is often a, a shifting, um,
landscape of security requirements as threats evolve.
So both matters are closely under review,
which is probably about as much as I can say this.
I was trying to be careful here.
I appreciate Sensitivity
Around.
Do you have confidence you can be as responsive
as you think you need to be for those evolving
security considerations?
Yes, because we are very closely, uh,
'cause we prioritize security.
It's very important, uh, for our people and our information
and we work very closely with the relevant parts
of the New Zealand system and keep it under constant review.
The senior leadership teams had a discussion on this very
topic within, within days of this discussion.
So it's, it's, it's front and center.
Okay. All right.
Well, we might move into the final sec, uh, section,
which is effectively a free for all.
Uh, any questions on particular areas
that we've covered already that they wish to readdress
or any other aspects that haven't, um, been highlighted
through the consideration so far?
We delved into that, um, one actually
that I probably should have asked in the previous section
came for an update on the
new build project just up the road here. Mm,
Sure.
Uh, so we, um, are required to move out of HSBC tower,
which we have occupied for about 20 years, Rob, uh,
because that building will undergo seismic strengthening.
Um, and so we are moving
to a building which you can see probably out the windows
here, um, in around a year's time.
Um, so that build is well underway.
Um, uh,
and the project has has, you know, had one
or two, um, uh, setbacks.
There was, uh, as you might have seen in the media,
significant issue where a steel beam,
which was on site getting ready to be located was, um,
was blown away and blown away, but,
but shifted in position by very high wins.
Um, uh, that caused a slight pause in the project,
but now I think time has been made up on that.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and so we are,
we are proceeding the plan to move in a year's time.
Okay. We look forward being to being closer to the part.
Yes.
Excellent. Right. Other questions?
Well, yeah, I'll just, my, my last one just
around development in the Pacific, if I can.
Sorry. Um, I was just really interested in reading some
of your strategy and policy documents and stuff and,
and, uh, just two aspects to it.
One, there's a line where you talk about, um,
climate financing crowding in, uh, private finance.
Mm-Hmm. And I know you would've chosen
that word crowd very carefully.
You just explain what you mean by that.
I think, um, by 35 years of training,
I choose my words fairly carefully.
I would say mobilizing is probably a better word
than, than crowding in.
Um, uh, the idea is,
and I'm, I'm think we've probably made less progress
on this than we would've liked.
The idea is to supplement our climate finance capabilities,
um, which are obviously limited by the size of the je, um,
uh, by bringing in private donors into the process. Yep,
Exactly.
Bringing in private donors, bringing in sort of, um, some
of those big philanthropic, um, funds, sort of trying
to interest, then trying to engage with some
of the big funds like, um, green Climate Fund,
um, the Jeff facility.
There's a lot of, a lot
of different financing options out there.
And one of the real challenges that we're trying to work
with with Pacific Partners is some of 'em have said to us,
they've almost given up trying to access them
because they're just so complex
and they kind of have to submit literally dossiers
of hundreds of papers, hundreds of pages in order just
to be able to get a project, sort of go through a process.
So that's a, there's the actual finance piece
and then there's the way you access it,
which is I think just as important.
Yeah. So we are trying to basically spread the load
and get in as much funding as
We can. And, and that does make
sense. It's the word crowd just
popped up a couple of times, but,
'cause I, I know you talked about wanting
to leverage like-minded bilateral partners
and multilateral organizations.
I was just wondering and you've, IM part answered
that I think, I mean,
but how, how that's going are, are we being left
to go alone out there?
Are we seeing good support
or does the world wanna focus somewhere else?
This is across the, this is
public as well as private finance. Yeah.
Well, I guess I'm thinking of
how is New Zealand doing in the Pacific?
Are we getting support from um,
other like-minded bilateral partners
that we might expect or hope to?
Or are we being left to kind of go it alone to some extent,
or take the lion's share?
It's a team, it's a team effort.
Um, uh, there's, you know,
obviously Australia is a very
significant donor in the Pacific.
Sure. More, more so than us.
Uh, Japan, European Union, the United States, which is has,
you know, in recent years, rebalanced quite significantly
towards pacifically across almost all domains.
Um, uh, there are entities including a group called Partners
of the Blue Pacific who are there
to support PIF Pacific Island Forum goals.
Uh, there are various forums, uh, New Zealand, Australia,
France, uh, the US are all, are all very tight on this.
It is, um, there's a lot of work to be done,
but we're absolutely not having to do it on our own.
Okay. Thanks. Can I ask a up on that?
I I I was wondering, uh, if you had an example,
'cause it sounds, it sounds com it sounds complicated, uh,
in terms of the relationships that you all have
to have to navigate.
But I was wondering if there is an example
where you've been able to, um, that you could share with us
where you've been able to successfully sort of, uh,
to engage in a, in a, in a process
and say, well, this is our bit, um,
and we're partnered up with a, with different countries
or other organizations, um,
and with a mind to how you, how you got there.
So sort of Sure.
An example of your diplomatic skill,
if I could put it that way.
Always happy to talk about that.
I mean, you mentioned the partners of the Blue Pacific
and it's, it's probably a good, a good setting
to answer the question because there's a project under its
auspices, which is about procuring a fisheries research
vessel for the Pacific.
So that is, that is something that is underway.
Uh, there is a, I think also some work undergoing, uh,
underway in that area on cyber protection
for Pacific Island governments.
And I think there's a third activity, uh, relating
to humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.
So all those things have arisen, uh, arisen out
of this desire to take a more collaborative approach.
And one which, and this is very important, aligns
with Pacific priorities.
Um, and then there are activities, um, uh,
where in particular I think New Zealand
and Australia are, are jointly engaged on particular
projects Bernadette may wish to elaborate on on those.
Yeah. Thanks Be um,
and actually, so really good one, um,
runways in Solomon Islands, which you went to sort
of the opening of, and that connectivity piece is just
so critical for the Pacific because they're just so spread.
Uh, so working with Australia,
particularly on those projects about trying
to improve the connectivity across the region
and a really specific one
that's underway at the moment is in Kitas
where we are building a hospital and we're building it
and Japan is going to do the fit out of it.
So it's actually a really great sort of collaboration
of sort of playing to our respective, um,
strengths and skills.
So, um, they, uh, I'm not gonna lie that they're complex.
It's clearly much more complex when
you're working with another donor.
'cause we each have our own sets of public finance acts
and accountabilities and other things.
But it really can make a huge difference actually.
So it's, um, so there's just two specific ones.
Yeah. And Tiana, you had a Primary question as well.
Yeah, I just, uh, one of update, I, I mean I got some, um,
been in contact with Iranian Solidarity group
and I, I know that there's some,
been some work being done in terms of, um, support
of human rights issues in Afghanistan.
Um, as well as, as well as in Iran.
And um, my understanding is that this has been support
for German lead, um, initiative there.
I was wondering if you had an could give us an update or
Yeah. And
we'll be happy to talk about that, about that one.
Um, but in both cases, obviously human rights situations
are, are of great concern to us.
Um, uh, given developments in, in Iran in, uh,
the recent past and uh,
and given the return of the Taliban mm-Hmm.
Um, on Afghanistan,
the minister told Minister Babbo the German foreign minister
last week that he was pleased to provide political support
for an initiative which Germany is running.
Okay. Which is to engage direct with a number
of other countries, which is to engage directly
with the Taliban to try
and convince them to take a slightly more,
uh, what's the right word?
Enlightened. Yes.
That's the one enlightened approach to the treatment
of women and girls in particular, um, uh,
recognition policies mean that we didn't want to join
that directly because to talk directly
to the Taliban might imply
that they were the legitimate government of Afghanistan
and we don't want to go that far.
But we're certainly supportive of the initiative
and hope that might make some progress.
Um, on Iran, we obviously
reduced the scope of our bilateral engagements
with them in 2022 in the wake
of the Masa Armini case and the process.
But we continue to make representations to them
to encourage them again to take a more enlightened approach.
Um, I think I saw just this morning
that the legislation they had been going to pass on
hijab wearing, um, has now been postponed for the moment,
which is a tiny piece of good news.
But as I say, although we are not progressing any sort
of bilateral initiatives these days with Iran, we continue
to make points to 'em about their human
rights abuses in country.
Yeah. Thank you for that update.
Damien O'Connor, uh, look, thank you.
Given that you're hanging around
and we can't quite finish on the eCommerce moratorium.
Well we can whenever you direct
another one from Benelli, um, on the e-commerce moratorium,
while we have been supportive of it,
it comes potentially at a huge cost to us in terms of income
that the government could receive from
multinationals in the absence of progress in the OECD.
How long are we going to continue to promote
and support a moratorium given
the potential cost to our country?
So, so there are actually two things there.
'cause one's the digital digital services tax, um,
and one's the e-commerce moratorium.
So the e-commerce moratorium is the one in Geneva that
focuses on whether, uh, which
continues the moratorium on allowing, um, WT O members
to charge a tariff on a digital transaction.
The digital services tax question, um, is one
that the OECD is working on as you know,
and as I think you also know, um,
our strong preference is not to go to unilateral measures,
but instead to find ways to do that in a multilateral
or PLU later settle set of setting.
And that continues to be the, the approach here
and that's certainly the way we're, um, looking
to proceed at this stage.
Have you provided the government with any,
any different advice given that each 12 months
that rolls on the circumstances do shift?
So the only, only bit of advice
that we change is an update on what's happening at the O in
the OCD negotiations.
Um, but the position
that the ministry has taken into the advice that we've
provided ministers has always been unilateralism is not the
way to proceed in that really this needs a PLU lateral
or a multilateral solution.
Dan Kirk ra um, thank you Mr. Chair.
My questions, um, going back to the IDC, sorry, um, Gerald.
Yeah. Um, because I just wanted
to understand a little bit more about the, um,
gender equality and women's empowerment objective,
which I see, um, whilst you spent a good, um, a fair chunk
of um, funds in that space, um, didn't meet the objective,
uh, target, but also just interested to understand,
you know, a bit more about what's going on in there
and why it didn't make the objective.
Yeah, great question.
Um, it is an area
that we are going backwards across the region
and gender, um, everything from, uh,
political representation, which is, um,
terrible in some countries.
So it is probably not a diplomatic word, sorry, B
but it's wasn't the CCPA conference in Sydney.
Okay. Some of those. Exactly.
And sort of here in apart from New Guinea,
I think they maybe dub up to two mps
of two female nmps out of their house.
Um, and others we've gone to zero.
So we've got some real challenges at the political level.
We've got more challenges at probably just general
leadership levels, um,
and a lot flows down from from that.
So we are trying now to, we call it mainstream
and we are trying to ensure that the vast majority of things
that we do at least have a gender component.
At least you have at least you ask the question,
making sure we are not gonna disadvantage, uh, females, um,
girls in these activities.
So at least, at least you've asked the question.
Now it's not gonna work for everything that we do
and that's fine, but at, but we want to try
and have it as a core part of what we do
because alongside sort of some of our bad representation,
uh, statistics, we've also, um,
now there's some really bad sort of, uh,
family based violence type, um,
statistics also going in the wrong direction.
So it's a really complex space and,
and you're right, we are taking a bit of a, a bit
of a stock take now because we've been working in this space
for years and things are going backwards.
So you don't have a good answer for you at the moment.
It's a genuine concern. Okay.
And so could you just, sorry, can I keep going?
Um, could you just give me some idea of what was done
for the five hundred and fifty five fifty $1 million?
So a lot of those will be activities that will have sort
of a gender component to them.
So there might be an agriculture activity for example. Nice.
Making sure that they're also accessible for, uh, for um,
women farmers and for others to get their produce
to the market right through to maybe some specific, uh,
activities focused on girls in, in education
and trying to lift the education, uh, achievement and
or access first, but then achievement of girls.
So it can kind of be specific in, in that big total
specific activities through to,
it's a component of something else.
Okay. Would we be able to Yeah,
I happy a little bit more about Yeah.
Get you lot of thank you. Be lots of information.
Excellent, thank you. Alright, well I think that comes
to an end for our session today.
Uh, secretary, thank you very much for your time.
Thank you to your wider team for their contribution as well.
And can we just express our banks
and appreciation to the wider, in fact team,
particularly those representing
New Zealand around the globe.
They do a fantastic job for us.
It's an important piece of work
and we really appreciate that.
Thank you chairman for, um, the hearing this morning,
but also for that very thoughtful message,
which I'll be really happy to pass on.
Wonderful. Thank you. This is you? Yes.
Alright. That ends the public session. We will now go into.